Once upon a time a queen had a little son , who was so ugly and
ill-made , that for a long time the poor little baby was thought hardly
human . However , a good fairy , who presided at his birth , assured his
mother that , though ugly , he would have so much sense and wit that he
would never be disagreeable; moreover , she bestowed on him the power
of communicating these gifts to the person he should love best in the
world . At this the queen was a little comforted , and became still more
so , when , as soon as he could speak , the infant began to say such
pretty and clever things that everybody was charmed with him .  ( I
forgot to mention that his name was Riquet with the Tuft , because he
was born with a curious tuft of hair on the top of his head . ) 

Seven or eight years after this , the queen of a neighbouring country
had two little daughters , twins , at whose birth the same fairy
presided . The elder twin was more beautiful than the day--the younger
so extremely ugly that the mother ' s extravagant joy in the first was
all turned to grief about the second . So , in order to calm her
feelings , the fairy told her that the one daughter should be as stupid
as she was pretty , while the other would grow up so clever and
charming that nobody would miss her want of beauty . 

 " Heaven grant it ! " sighed the queen;  " but are there no means of giving
a little sense to the one who is so beautiful ? " 

 " I can do nothing for her , madam , " returned the fairy-- " nothing as
regards her own fortunes; but I grant her the power of making the
person who best pleases her as handsome as herself . " 

Accordingly , as the young princesses grew up , their perfections grew
with them; and nothing was spoken of but the beauty of the elder and
the wit of the younger . True , their faults increased equally: the one
became uglier , and the other more stupid , day by day . Unlucky fair
one ! she never had a word to say for herself , or else it was the
silliest word imaginable , and she was so awkward that she could not
place four teacups in a row without breaking at least one of them , nor
drink a glass of water without spilling half of it over her clothes . 
Beauty is a great charm; yet , whenever the sisters went out together , 
those who were attracted by the elder ' s lovely face , in less than half
an hour were sure to be seen at the side of the younger , laughing at
her witty and pleasant sayings , and altogether deserting the poor
beauty , who had just sense enough to find it out , and to feel that she
would have given all her good looks for one half of her sister ' s
talents . 

One day , when she had hid herself in a wood , and was crying over her
hard fate , she saw coming towards her a little man , very ugly , but
magnificently dressed . Who should this be but Prince Riquet with the
Tuft ? He had seen her portrait , had fallen desperately in love with
her , and secretly quitted his father ' s kingdom that he might have the
pleasure of meeting her . Delighted to find her alone , he came forward
with all the respect and politeness imaginable . But he could not help
noticing how very melancholy she was , and that all the elegant
compliments he made her did not seem to affect her in the least . 

 " I cannot comprehend , madam , " said he ,  " how so charming and lovely a
lady can be so very sad . Never did I see anyone who could at all
compare with you . " 

 " That ' s all you know , " said the princess , and stopped . 

 " Beauty , " continued the prince , sighing ,  " is so great an advantage
that , if one possessed it , one would never trouble oneself about
anything else . 

 " I wish I were as ugly as you and had some sense , rather than be as
handsome as I am , and such a fool . " 

 " Madam , " said Riquet politely , though her speech was not exactly
civil ,  " nothing shows intellect so much as the modesty of believing
one does not possess it . " 

 " I don ' t know that; but I know I am a great fool , and it vexes me so , 
that I wish I was dead , " cried the princess bitterly . 

 " If that is all , madam , I can easily put an end to your grief , for I
have the power of making the person I love best as clever as I
please . I will do it , provided you consent to marry me . " 

The princess stood dumb with astonishment . She--to marry that little
frightful creature--scarcely a man at all ! 

 " I see , " said Riquet ,  " that my proposal offends and grieves you . Well , 
I will give you a year to consider it . " 

Now the young lady was so stupid that she thought a year ' s end was a
long way off--so long that it seemed as if it might not come at all , 
or something might happen between whiles . And she had such a longing
to be clever and admired that she thought at all risks she would
accept the chance of becoming so . Accordingly , she promised Riquet to
marry him that day twelvemonth . 

No sooner had she said it than she felt herself quite another being . 
She found she could at once say anything she chose , and say it in the
most graceful and brilliant way . She began a lively conversation with
Prince Riquet , and chattered so fast and so wittily , that he began to
be afraid he had given her so much cleverness as to leave himself
none . 

When she returned to the palace , all the court were astonished at the
change . She , who had annoyed everybody by the impertinent , tasteless , 
or downright foolish things she uttered , now charmed everybody by her
wit , her pleasantness , and her exceeding good sense . The king himself
began to come to her apartment , and ask her advice in state affairs . 
Her mother , and indeed the whole kingdom , were delighted; the only
person to be pitied was the poor younger sister , of whom nobody now
took the least notice . 

Meantime , princes came in throngs to ask in marriage this wonderful
princess , who was as clever as she was beautiful; but she found none
to suit her , probably because the more sense a lady has , the more
difficult she is to please . As for her promise to Riquet with the
Tuft , being given in the days when she was so dull and stupid , it now
never once came into her head; until one day , being quite perplexed by
her numerous suitors , she went to take a solitary walk and think the
matter over , when by chance she came into the same wood where she had
met the prince . There , all of a sudden , she thought she heard a queer
running about and chattering underground .  " Fetch me that spit , " cried
one;  " Put some more wood on that fire , " said another; and by and by
the earth opened , showing a great kitchen filled with cooks , cooking a
splendid banquet . They were all working merrily at their several
duties , and singing together in the most lively chorus . 

 " What is all this about ? " asked the amazed princess . 

 " If you please , madam , " replied the head-cook , politely ,  " we are
cooking the wedding-dinner of Prince Riquet with the Tuft , who is to
be married to-morrow . " 

 " To-morrow ! " cried the princess , all at once recollecting her promise;
at which she was so frightened that she thought she should have
fallen to the earth . Greater still was her alarm when , at only a few
steps ' distance , she beheld Riquet , dressed splendidly like a prince
and a bridegroom . 

 " You see me , princess , exact to my word; and I doubt not you are the
same , come to make me the happiest of mankind . " 

 " Prince , " said the lady , frankly ,  " I must confess that such was not my
intention , and I fear I shall never be able to do as you desire . " 

 " You surprise me , madam . " 

 " I can well believe it; and if I had to do with a brute , instead of a
gentleman of sense and feeling , I should be very uneasy , " returned
she;  " but since I speak with the cleverest man in the world , I am sure
he will hear reason , and will not bind me , now a sensible woman , to a
promise I made when I was only a fool . " 

 " If I were a fool myself , madam , I might well complain of your broken
promise; and being , as you say , a man of sense , should I not complain
of what takes away all the happiness of my life ? Tell me candidly , is
there anything in me , except my ugliness , which displeases you ? Do you
object to my birth , my temper , my manners ? " 

 " No , truly , " replied the princess;  " I like everything in you , 
except " --and she hesitated courteously-- " except your appearance . " 

 " Then , madam , I need not lose my happiness; for if I have the gift of
making clever whosoever I love best , you also are able to make the
person you prefer as handsome as ever you please . Could you love me
enough to do that ? " 

 " I think I could , " said the princess , and her heart being greatly
softened towards him , she wished that he might become the handsomest
prince in all the world . No sooner had she done so than Riquet with
the Tuft appeared in her eyes the most elegant young man she had ever
seen . 

Ill-natured people have said that this was no fairy-gift , but that
love created the change . They declare that the princess , when she
thought over her lover ' s perseverance , patience , good-humour , and
discretion , and counted his numerous fine qualities of mind and
disposition , saw no longer the deformity of his body or the plainness
of his features; that his hump was merely an exaggerated stoop , and
his awkward movements became only an interesting eccentricity . Nay , 
even his eyes , which squinted terribly , seemed always looking on all
sides for her , in token of his violent love , and his great red nose
gave him an air very martial and heroic . 

However this may be , it is certain that the princess married him; that
either she retained her good sense , or he never felt the want of it;
and he never again became ugly--or , at least , not in his wife ' s eyes;
so they both lived very happy until they died . 


