There lived in Norway , not far from the city of Drontheim , a rich and
prosperous gentleman . He had an only daughter , called Aslog , the fame
of whose beauty spread far and wide . The greatest men of the country
sought her , but all were alike unsuccessful in their suit . Her father , 
who thought his daughter delayed her choice only that she might choose
the better , forbore to interfere , and exulted in her prudence . But
when , at length , the richest and noblest had tried their fortune with
as little success as the rest , he grew angry , called his daughter , and
said to her:--

 " Hitherto I have left you to your free choice , but since I see that
you reject all without any distinction , and the very best of your
suitors seem not good enough for you , I will keep measures no longer
with you . What ! shall my family become extinct , and my inheritance
pass away into the hands of strangers ? I will break your stubborn
spirit . I give you now till the festival of the great Winter-night; by
that time you must make your decision , or prepare to accept the
husband whom I myself shall select . " 

Now Aslog secretly loved a youth named Orm , handsome , noble and brave . 
She loved him with her whole soul , and would sooner die than bestow
her hand on another . But Orm was poor , and poverty compelled him to
keep his love as secret as her own . 

When Aslog saw the darkness of her father ' s countenance , and heard his
angry words , she turned pale as death , for she knew his temper , and
doubted not but that he would put his threats into execution . Without
uttering a word in reply , she retired to her chamber , and pondered
vainly how to escape the storm that hung over her . The great festival
approached nearer and nearer , and her anguish increased every day . 

At last the lovers resolved on flight . Orm knew a secure place , where
they could hide until they found an opportunity of quitting the
country . So at night , when all were asleep , he led the trembling Aslog
over the snow and ice-fields away to the mountains . The moon and the
stars lighted them on their way . They had under their arms a few
articles of dress and some skins of animals , which were all they could
carry . They ascended the mountains the whole night long , till they
reached a lonely spot inclosed with lofty rocks . Here Orm conducted
the weary Aslog into a cave , the low and narrow entrance to which was
hardly perceptible , but it soon enlarged to a great hall , reaching
deep into the mountain . He kindled a fire , and they now , reposing on
their skins , sat in the deepest solitude far away from all the world . 

Orm was the first who had discovered this cave , which is shown to this
very day . But as no one then knew anything of it , they were safe from
the pursuit of Aslog ' s father . They passed the whole winter in this
retirement , contented and even happy; for they knew they were married , 
and belonged to one another , and no cruel father could separate them
more . Orm used to go a-hunting , and Aslog stayed at home in the cave , 
minded the fire , and prepared the necessary food . Frequently did she
mount the points of the rocks , but her eyes , did they wander ever so
far , saw only glittering snow-fields . 

The spring now came on--the woods were green--the meadows put on their
various colors , people began to wander out for summer pleasuring , and
Aslog could but rarely and with circumspection venture to leave the
cave . One evening Orm came in with the intelligence that he had
recognised her father ' s servants in the distance , and that he could
hardly have been unobserved by them .  " They will surround this place , " 
continued he ,  " and never rest till they have found us; we must quit
our retreat , then , without a moment ' s delay . " 

They accordingly descended on the other side of the mountain , and
reached the strand , where they fortunately found a boat . Orm pushed
off , and the boat drove into the open sea . They had escaped their
pursuers , but they were now exposed to dangers of another kind:
whither should they turn ? They could not venture to land , for Aslog ' s
father was lord of the whole coast , and they would infallibly fall
into his hands . Nothing then remained for them but to commit their
bark to the wind and waves . They were driven along the entire night . 
At break of day the coast had disappeared , and they saw nothing but
the sky , the sea , and the waves . They had not brought one morsel of
food with them , and thirst and hunger began now to torment them . Three
days did they toss about in this state of misery , and Aslog , faint and
exhausted , saw nothing but certain death before her . 

At length , on the evening of the third day , they discovered an island
of tolerable magnitude , and surrounded by a number of smaller ones . 
Orm immediately steered for it , but , just as he came near it , there
suddenly rose a violent wind , and the sea rolled every moment higher
and higher . He turned about with a view of approaching it on another
side , but with no better success; his vessel , as often as it neared
the island , was driven back as if by an invisible power .  " God help
us ! " he cried , and crossed himself , and looked on poor Aslog , who
seemed to be dying of weakness before his eyes . But scarcely had the
exclamation passed his lips when the storm ceased , the waves subsided , 
and the vessel came to the shore without encountering any hindrance . 
Orm jumped out on the beach; some mussels that he found on the strand
strengthened and revived the exhausted Aslog , so that she was soon
able to leave the boat . 

The island was overgrown with low dwarf shrubs , and seemed to be
uninhabited; but when they had reached the middle of it , they
discovered a house , which appeared to be half under the surface of
the earth . In the hope of meeting with human help , the wanderers
approached it . They listened , but the most perfect silence reigned
there . Orm at length opened the door , and they both walked in: but
what was their surprise , to find everything regulated and arranged as
if for inhabitants , yet not a single living creature visible . The fire
was burning on the hearth , in the middle of the room , and a kettle
with fish hung on it , apparently only waiting for some one to take it
up and eat it . The beds were made , and ready to receive their wearied
tenants . Orm and Aslog stood for some time dubious , and looked on with
a certain degree of awe , but at last , overcome by hunger , they took up
the food and ate . When they had satisfied their appetites , and still
discovered no human being , they gave way to weariness , and laid
themselves in the beds , which looked so peaceful and inviting to their
wearied limbs . 

They had expected to be awakened in the night by the owners of the
house on their return home , but their expectation was not fulfilled;
they slept undisturbed till the morning sun shone in upon them . No one
appeared on any of the following days , and it seemed as if some
invisible power had made ready the house for their reception . They
spent the whole summer in perfect happiness: they were , to be sure , 
solitary , yet they did not miss mankind . The wild birds ' eggs , and the
fish they caught , yielded them provisions in abundance . 

When autumn came , Aslog brought forth a son . In the midst of their
joy at this , they were surprised by a wonderful apparition . The door
opened on a sudden , and an old woman stepped in . She wore a handsome
blue dress; there was something proud , but at the same time something
strange , in her appearance . 

 " Do not be afraid , " said she ,  " at my unexpected appearance . I am the
owner of this house , and I thank you for the clean and neat state in
which you have kept it , and for the good order in which I find
everything with you . I would willingly have come sooner , but I had no
power to do so till this little heathen  ( pointing to the new-born
babe ) was come to the light . Now I have free access . Only fetch no
priest from the mainland to christen it , or I must depart again . If
you will in this matter comply with my wishes , you may not only
continue to live here , but all the good that ever you can wish for I
will do you . Whatever you take in hand shall prosper; good luck shall
follow you wherever you go . But break this condition , and depend upon
it that misfortune after misfortune will come on you , and even on this
child will I avenge myself . If you want anything , or are in danger , 
you have only to pronounce my name three times , and I will appear and
lend you assistance . I am of the race of the old giants , and my name
is Guru . But beware of uttering in my presence the name of Him whom no
giant may hear of , and never venture to make the sign of the cross , or
to cut it on beam or board in the house . You may dwell in this house
the whole year long , only be so good as to give it up to me on Yule
evening , when the sun is at the lowest , as then we celebrate our great
festival , and then only are we permitted to be merry . At least , if you
should not be willing to go out of the house , keep yourselves up in
the loft as quiet as possible the whole day long , and as you value
your lives do not look down into the room below until midnight is
past . After that you may take possession of everything again . " 

When the old woman had thus spoken she vanished , and Aslog and Orm
lived without any disturbance , contented and happy . Orm never made a
cast of his net without getting a plentiful draught; he never shot an
arrow from his bow that it was not sure to hit; in short , whatever
they took in hand , were it ever so trifling , evidently prospered . 

When Christmas came , they cleaned up the house in the best manner , set
everything in order , kindled a fire on the hearth , and as the twilight
approached they went up to the loft , where they remained quite still
and quiet . At length it grew dark; they thought they heard a sound of
whizzing and snorting in the air , such as the swans used to make in
the winter time . There was a hole in the roof over the fireplace , 
which might be opened and shut either to let in the light from above , 
or to afford a free passage for the smoke . Orm lifted up the lid , 
which was covered with a skin , and put out his head . But what a
wonderful sight then presented itself to his eyes ! The little islands
around were all lit up with countless blue lights , which moved about
without ceasing , jumped up and down , then skipped to the shore , 
assembled together , and came nearer and nearer to the large island
where Orm and Aslog lived . At last they reached it , and arranged
themselves in a circle around a large stone not far from the shore , 
and which Orm well knew . But what was his surprise when he saw that
the stone had now completely assumed the form of a man , though a
monstrous and gigantic one ! He could clearly perceive that the little
blue lights were borne by Dwarfs whose pale clay-coloured faces , with
their huge noses and red eyes , disfigured too by birds ' bills and
owls ' eyes , were supported by misshapen bodies , and they tottered and
wabbled about here and there , so that they seemed to be at the same
time merry and in pain . Suddenly , the circle opened; the little ones
retired on each side , and Guru--who was the woman Guru , whom Orm
recognised immediately , though she had risen in stature and size so as
to be almost as gigantic as the stone man--advanced towards it . She
threw both her arms round the image , which immediately seemed to
receive life and motion . Then the Dwarfs , with wonderful capers and
grimaces , began a song , or , to speak more properly , a howl , with which
the whole island resounded and almost trembled at the noise . Orm , 
quite terrified , drew in his head , and he and Aslog remained in the
dark , so still that they hardly ventured to draw their breath . 

The procession moved on towards the house , as might be clearly
perceived by the nearer approach of the shouting and crying . They were
now all come in , light and active; the Dwarfs were heard jumping about
on the benches , and heavy and loud sounded at intervals the steps of
the giants . Orm and his wife listened to the clattering of the plates , 
and the shouts of joy with which they celebrated their banquet . When
it was over and midnight drew near , they began to dance to that
ravishing fairy-tune , which some have heard in the rocky glens , and
learned by listening to the underground musicians . As soon as Aslog
caught the sound of this air , she felt an irresistible longing to see
the dance . Nor was Orm able to keep her back .  " Let me look , " said she , 
 " or my heart will burst . " She took her child and placed herself at the
extreme end of the loft , whence , without being observed , she could see
all that passed . Long did she gaze , without taking off her eyes for an
instant , on the dance--on the bold and wonderful springs of the little
creatures , who seemed to float in the air , and not so much as to touch
the ground , while the ravishing melody of the Elves filled her whole
soul . The child , meanwhile , which lay in her arms grew sleepy and drew
its breath heavily , and , without ever thinking on the promise she had
given the old woman , she made , as is usual , the sign of the cross over
the mouth of the child , and said ,  " Christ bless you , my babe ! " 

The instant she had spoken the word there was raised a horrible , 
piercing cry . The Dwarfs tumbled head over heels out at the door with
terrible crushing and crowding , their lights went out , and in a few
minutes the whole house was clear of them and left desolate . Orm and
Aslog , frightened to death , hid themselves in the most retired nook
they could find . They did not venture to stir till daybreak , and not
till the sun shone through the hole in the roof down on the fireplace
did they feel courage enough to descend from the loft . 

The table remained still covered as the underground people had left
it; all their vessels , which were of silver , and manufactured in the
most beautiful manner , lay upon it . In the middle of the room , there
stood upon the ground a huge copper kettle half full of sweet mead , 
and by the side of it a drinking-horn of pure gold . In the corner
rested , against the wall , a stringed instrument , not unlike a
dulcimer , which , as people believe , the Giantesses used to play on . 
They gazed on what was before them , full of admiration , but without
venturing to lay their hands on anything; how great and fearful was
their amazement , when , on turning about , they saw sitting at the table
an immense figure , which Orm instantly recognised as the Giant whom
Guru had animated by her embrace . He was now a cold and hard stone . 
While they were standing gazing on it , Guru herself entered the room
in her giant form . She wept so bitterly , that her tears trickled down
on the ground . It was long ere her sobbing permitted her to utter a
single word; at last she spoke:--

 " Great affliction have you brought on me , and henceforth I must weep
while I live; yet as I know that you have not done this with evil
intentions , I forgive you , though it were a trifle for me to crush the
whole house like an egg-shell over your heads . " 

 " What have we done ? " cried Orm and Aslog , penetrated with the deepest
sorrow . 

 " Alas ! " answered she ,  " my husband , whom I love more than myself , there
he sits , petrified for ever; never again will he open his eyes ! Three
hundred years lived I with my father on the island of Kunnan , happy in
the innocence of youth , as the fairest among the Giant-maidens . Mighty
heroes sued for my hand; the sea around that island is still filled
with the rocky fragments which they hurled against each other in their
combats . Andfind won the victory , and I plighted myself to him . But
ere I was married came the detestable Odin into the country , who
overcame my father , and drove us all from the island . My father and
sisters fled to the mountains , and since that time my eyes have beheld
them no more . Andfind and I saved ourselves on this island , where we
for a long time lived in peace and quiet , and thought it would never
be interrupted . But destiny which no one escapes , had determined it
otherwise . Oluf came from Britain . They called him the Holy , and
Andfind instantly found that his voyage would be inauspicious to the
Giants . When he heard how Oluf ' s ship rushed through the waves , he
went down to the strand and blew the sea against him with all his
strength . The waves swelled up like mountains . But Oluf was still
more mighty than he; his ship flew unchecked through the billows like
an arrow from a bow . He steered direct for our island . When the ship
was so near that Andfind thought he could reach it with his hands , he
grasped at the forepart with his right hand , and was about to drag it
down to the bottom , as he had often done with other ships . But Oluf , 
the terrible Oluf , stepped forward , and crossing his hands over each
other , he cried with a loud voice ,  " Stand there as a stone till the
last day , " and in the same instant my unhappy husband became a mass of
rock . The ship sailed on unimpeded , and ran direct against the
mountain , which it cut through , and separated from it the little
island which lies out yonder . 

 " Ever have I passed my life alone and forlorn . On Yule-eve alone can
petrified Giants receive back their life for the space of seven hours , 
if one of their race embraces them , and is at the same time willing to
sacrifice a hundred years . I loved my husband too well not to bring
him back to life every time that I could do it , even at this price , 
and I have not even counted how often I have done it , that I might not
know the hour when I myself should share his fate , and at the moment
when I threw my arms around him become stone like him . But , alas ! even
this comfort is taken from me; I can never more by any embrace awake
him . He has heard the Name which I dare not utter , and never again
will he see the light until the dawn of the last day shall bring it . 

 " I now go hence , and you will behold me no more . All that is here in
the house I give you; my dulcimer alone will I keep . But let no one
venture to fix his habitation on the small islands that lie around
here . There dwell the little underground people whom you saw at the
festival , and I will protect them as long as I live ! " 

With these words Guru vanished . The next spring Orm took the golden
horn and the silverware to Drontheim , where no one knew him . The value
of these precious metals was so great that he was able to purchase
everything requisite for a wealthy man . He laded his ship with his
purchases , and returned back to the island , where he spent many years
in unalloyed happiness , and Aslog ' s father was soon reconciled to his
wealthy son-in-law . 

The huge image remained sitting in the house; no human power was able
to move it . So hard was the stone , that hammer and axe flew in pieces
without making the slightest impression upon it . The giant sat there
till a holy man came to the island , who with one single word removed
him back to his former station , where he stands to this hour . The
copper kettle , which the underground people left behind them , was
preserved as a memorial upon the island , which bears the name of House
Island to the present day . 


