
In the fragrance of the blossom of the limes the bees are gleaning a
luscious harvest. Their busy humming sounds like the surf on a reef
heard from very far away, and would almost lull to sleep those who
lazily, drowsily spend the sunny summer afternoon in the shadow of the
trees. That line of bee-hives by the sweet-pea hedge shows where they
store their treasure that men may rob them of it, but out on the
uplands where the heather is purple, the wild bees hum in and out of
the honey-laden bells and carry home their spoils to their own free
fastnesses, from which none can drive them unless there comes a foray
against them from the brown men of the moors.

How many of us who watch their ardent labours know the story of
Aristæus--he who first brought the art of bee-keeping to perfection in
his own dear land of Greece, and whose followers are those men in
veils of blue and green, that motley throng who beat fire-irons and
create a hideous clamour in order that the queen bee and her excited
followers may be checked in their perilous voyagings and beguiled to
swarm in the sanctuary of a hive.

Aristæus was a shepherd, the son of Cyrene, a water nymph, and to him
there had come one day, as he listened to the wild bees humming
amongst the wild thyme, the great thought that he might conquer these
busy workers and make their toil his gain. He knew that hollow trees
or a hole in a rock were used as the storage houses of their treasure,
and so the wily shepherd lad provided for them the homes he knew that
they would covet, and near them placed all the food that they most
desired. Soon Aristæus became noted as a tamer of bees, and even in
Olympus they spoke of his honey as a thing that was food for the gods.
All might have gone well with Aristæus had there not come for him the
fateful day when he saw the beautiful Eurydice and to her lost his
heart. She fled before the fiery protestations of his love, and trod
upon the serpent whose bite brought her down to the Shades. The gods
were angry with Aristæus, and as punishment they slew his bees. His
hives stood empty and silent, and no more did "the murmuring of
innumerable bees" drowse the ears of the herds who watched their
flocks cropping the red clover and the asphodel of the meadows.

Underneath the swift-flowing water of a deep river, the nymph who was
the mother of Aristæus sat on her throne. Fishes darted round her
white feet, and beside her sat her attendants, spinning the fine
strong green cords that twine themselves round the throats of those
who perish when their arms can no longer fight against the force of
the rushing current. A nymph sang as she worked, an old, old song,
that told one of the old, old tales of man's weakness and the power of
the creatures of water, but above her song those who listened heard a
man's voice, calling loudly and pitifully.

The voice was that of Aristæus, calling aloud for his mother. Then his
mother gave command, and the waters of the river rolled asunder and
let Aristæus pass down far below to where the fountains of the great
rivers lie. A mighty roar of many waters dinned in his ears as the
rivers started on the race that was to bring them all at last to their
restless haven, the Ocean. To Cyrene he came at length, and to her
told his sorrowful tale:

"To men who live their little lives and work and die as I
myself--though son of a nymph and of a god--must do," he said, "I have
brought two great gifts, oh my mother. I have taught them that from
the grey olives they can reap a priceless harvest, and from me they
have learned that the little brown bees that hum in and out of the
flowers may be made slaves that bring to them the sweetest riches of
which Nature may be robbed."

"This do I already know, my son," said Cyrene, and smiled upon
Aristæus.

"Yet dost thou not know," said Aristæus, "the doom that has overtaken
my army of busy workers. No longer does there come from my city of
bees the boom of many wings and many busy little feet as they fly,
swift and strong, hither and thither, to bring back to the hives
their honeyed treasure. The comb is empty. The bees are all dead--or,
if not dead, they have forsaken me forever."

Then spoke Cyrene. "Hast heard, my son," she said, "of Proteus? It is
he who herds the flocks of the boundless sea. On days when the South
Wind and the North Wind wrestle together, and when the Wind from the
East smites the West Wind in shame before him, thou mayst see him
raise his snowy head and long white beard above the grey-green waves
of the sea, and lash the white-maned, unbridled, fierce sea-horses
into fury before him. Proteus only--none but Proteus--can tell thee by
what art thou canst win thy bees back once more."

Then Aristæus with eagerness questioned his mother how he might find
Proteus and gain from him the knowledge that he sought, and Cyrene
answered: "No matter how piteously thou dost entreat him, never, save
by force, wilt thou gain his secret from Proteus. Only if thou canst
chain him by guile as he sleeps and hold fast the chains, undaunted by
the shapes into which he has the power to change himself, wilt thou
win his knowledge from him."

Then Cyrene sprinkled her son with the nectar of the deathless gods,
and in his heart there was born a noble courage and through him a new
life seemed to run.

"Lead me now to Proteus, oh my mother!" he said, and Cyrene left her
throne and led him to the cave where Proteus, herdsman of the seas,
had his dwelling. Behind the seaweed-covered rocks Aristæus concealed
himself, while the nymph used the fleecy clouds for her covering. And
when Apollo drove his chariot across the high heavens at noon, and all
land and all sea were hot as molten gold, Proteus with his flocks
returned to the shade of his great cave by the sobbing sea, and on its
sandy floor he stretched himself, and soon lay, his limbs all lax and
restful, in the exquisite joy of a dreamless sleep. From behind the
rocks Aristæus watched him, and when, at length, he saw that Proteus
slept too soundly to wake gently he stepped forward, and on the
sleep-drowsed limbs of Proteus fixed the fetters that made him his
captive. Then, in joy and pride at having been the undoing of the
shepherd of the seas, Aristæus shouted aloud. And Proteus, awaking,
swiftly turned himself into a wild boar with white tusks that lusted
to thrust themselves into the thighs of Aristæus. But Aristæus,
unflinching, kept his firm hold of the chain. Next did he become a
tiger, tawny and velvet black, and fierce to devour. And still
Aristæus held the chain, and never let his eye fall before the glare
of the beast that sought to devour him. A scaly dragon came next,
breathing out flames, and yet Aristæus held him. Then came a lion, its
yellow pelt scented with the lust of killing, and while Aristæus yet
strove against him there came to terrify his listening ears the sound
of fire that lapped up and thirstily devoured all things that would
stand against it. And ere the crackle of the flames and their great
sigh of fierce desire had ceased, there came in his ears the sound of
many waters, the booming rush of an angry river in furious flood, the
irresistible command of the almighty waves of the sea. Yet still
Aristæus held the chains, and at last Proteus took his own shape
again, and with a sigh like the sigh of winds and waves on the
desolate places where ships become wrecks, and men perish and there is
never a human soul to save or to pity them, he spoke to Aristæus.

"Puny one!" he said, "and puny are thy wishes! Because thou didst by
thy foolish wooing send the beautiful Eurydice swiftly down to the
Shades and break the heart of Orpheus, whose music is the music of the
Immortals, the bees that thou hast treasured have left their hives
empty and silent. So little are the bees! so great, O Aristæus, the
bliss or woe of Orpheus and Eurydice! Yet, because by guile thou hast
won the power to gain from me the knowledge that thou dost seek,
hearken to me now, Aristæus! Four bulls must thou find--four cows of
equal beauty. Then must thou build in a leafy grove four altars, and
to Orpheus and Eurydice pay such funeral honours as may allay their
resentment. At the end of nine days, when thou hast fulfilled thy
pious task, return and see what the gods have sent thee."

"This will I do most faithfully, O Proteus," said Aristæus, and
gravely loosened the chains and returned to where his mother awaited
him, and thence travelled to his own sunny land of Greece.

Most faithfully, as he had said, did Aristæus perform his vow. And
when, on the ninth day, he returned to the grove of sacrifice, a sound
greeted him which made his heart stop and then go on beating and
throbbing as the heart of a man who has striven valiantly in a great
fight and to whom the battle is assured.

For, from the carcase of one of the animals offered for sacrifice, and
whose clean white bones now gleamed in the rays of the sun that forced
its way through the thick shade of the grove of grey olives, there
came the "murmuring of innumerable bees."

"Out of the eater came forth meat, out of the strong came forth
sweetness."

And Aristæus, a Samson of the old Greek days, rejoiced exceedingly,
knowing that his thoughtless sin was pardoned, and that for evermore
to him belonged the pride of giving to all men the power of taming
bees, the glory of mastering the little brown creatures that pillage
from the fragrant, bright-hued flowers their most precious treasure.




PROSERPINE

 "Sacred Goddess, Mother Earth,
 Thou from whose immortal bosom,
 Gods, and men, and beasts have birth,
 Leaf and blade, and bud and blossom,
 Breathe thine influence most divine
 On thine own child, Proserpine.

 If with mists of evening dew
 Thou dost nourish those young flowers
 Till they grow, in scent and hue,
 Fairest children of the hours,
 Breathe thine influence most divine
 On thine own child, Proserpine."

 Shelley.


The story of Persephone--of Proserpine--is a story of spring. When the
sun is warming the bare brown earth, and the pale primroses look up
through the snowy blackthorns at a kind, blue sky, almost can we hear
the soft wind murmur a name as it gently sways the daffodils and
breathes through the honey sweetness of the gold-powdered catkins on
the grey willows by the river--"Persephone! Persephone!"

Now once there was a time when there was no spring, neither summer nor
autumn, nor chilly winter with its black frosts and cruel gales and
brief, dark days. Always was there sunshine and warmth, ever were
there flowers and corn and fruit, and nowhere did the flowers grow
with more dazzling colours and more fragrant perfume than in the fair
garden of Sicily.

To Demeter, the Earth Mother, was born a daughter more fair than any
flower that grew, and ever more dear to her became her child, the
lovely Proserpine. By the blue sea, in the Sicilian meadows,
Proserpine and the fair nymphs who were her companions spent their
happy days. Too short were the days for all their joy, and Demeter
made the earth yet fairer than it was that she might bring more
gladness to her daughter Proserpine. Each day the blossoms that the
nymphs twined into garlands grew more perfect in form and in hue, but
from the anemones of royal purple and crimson, and the riotous red of
geraniums, Proserpine turned one morning with a cry of gladness, for
there stood before her beside a little stream, on one erect, slim
stem, a wonderful narcissus, with a hundred blossoms. Her eager hand
was stretched out to pluck it, when a sudden black cloud overshadowed
the land, and the nymphs, with shrieks of fear, fled swiftly away. And
as the cloud descended, there was heard a terrible sound, as of the
rushing of many waters or the roll of the heavy wheels of the chariot
of one who comes to slay. Then was the earth cleft open, and from it
there arose the four coal-black horses of Pluto, neighing aloud in
their eagerness, while the dark-browed god urged them on, standing
erect in his car of gold.

 "'The coal-black horses rise--they rise,
 O mother, mother!' low she cries--
 Persephone--Persephone!
 'O light, light, light!' she cries, 'farewell;
 The coal-black horses wait for me.
 O shade of shades, where I must dwell,
 Demeter, mother, far from thee!'"[5]

In cold, strong arms Pluto seized her--in that mighty grasp that will
not be denied, and Proserpine wept childish tears as she shivered at
his icy touch, and sobbed because she had dropped the flowers she had
picked, and had never picked the flower she most desired. While still
she saw the fair light of day, the little oddly-shaped rocky hills,
the vineyards and olive groves and flowery meadows of Sicily, she did
not lose hope. Surely the King of Terrors could not steal one so
young, so happy, and so fair. She had only tasted the joy of living,
and fain she would drink deeper in the coming years. Her mother must
surely save her--her mother who had never yet failed her--her mother,
and the gods.

But ruthless as the mower whose scythe cuts down the seeded grass and
the half-opened flower and lays them in swathes on the meadow, Pluto
drove on. His iron-coloured reins were loose on the black manes of his
horses, and he urged them forward by name till the froth flew from
their mouths like the foam that the furious surf of the sea drives
before it in a storm. Across the bay and along the bank of the river
Anapus they galloped, until, at the river head, they came to the pool
of Cyane. He smote the water with his trident, and downward into the
blackness of darkness his horses passed, and Proserpine knew no more
the pleasant light of day.

 "What ails her that she comes not home?
 Demeter seeks her far and wide,
 And gloomy-browed doth ceaseless roam
 From many a morn till eventide.
 'My life, immortal though it be,
 Is nought,' she cries, 'for want of thee,
 Persephone--Persephone!'"

So, to the great Earth Mother came the pangs that have drawn tears of
blood from many a mortal mother's heart for a child borne off to the
Shades.

 "'My life is nought for want of thee,--
 Persephone! Persephone!'" ...

The cry is borne down through the ages, to echo and re-echo so long as
mothers love and Death is still unchained.

Over land and sea, from where Dawn, the rosy-fingered, rises in the
East, to where Apollo cools the fiery wheels of his chariot in the
waters of far western seas, the goddess sought her daughter. With a
black robe over her head and carrying a flaming torch in either hand,
for nine dreary days she sought her loved one. And yet, for nine more
weary days and nine sleepless nights the goddess, racked by human
sorrow, sat in hopeless misery. The hot sun beat upon her by day. By
night the silver rays from Diana's car smote her more gently, and the
dew drenched her hair and her black garments and mingled with the
saltness of her bitter tears. At the grey dawning of the tenth day her
elder daughter, Hecate, stood beside her. Queen of ghosts and shades
was she, and to her all dark places of the earth were known.

"Let us go to the Sun God," said Hecate. "Surely he hath seen the god
who stole away the little Proserpine. Soon his chariot will drive
across the heavens. Come, let us ask him to guide us to the place
where she is hidden."

Thus did they come to the chariot of the glorious Apollo, and standing
by the heads of his horses like two grey clouds that bar the passage
of the sun, they begged him to tell them the name of him who had
stolen fair Proserpine.

"No less a thief was he," said Apollo, "than Pluto, King of Darkness
and robber of Life itself. Mourn not, Demeter. Thy daughter is safe in
his keeping. The little nymph who played in the meadows is now Queen
of the Shades. Nor does Pluto love her vainly. She is now in love with
Death."

No comfort did the words of the Sun God bring to the longing soul of
Demeter. And her wounded heart grew bitter. Because she suffered,
others must suffer as well. Because she mourned, all the world must
mourn. The fragrant flowers spoke to her only of Persephone, the
purple grapes reminded her of a vintage when the white fingers of her
child had plucked the fruit. The waving golden grain told her that
Persephone was as an ear of wheat that is reaped before its time.

Then upon the earth did there come dearth and drought and barrenness.

 "The wheat
 Was blighted in the ear, the purple grapes
 Blushed no more on the vines, and all the gods
 Were sorrowful ..."

 Lewis Morris.

Gods and men alike suffered from the sorrow of Demeter. To her, in
pity for the barren earth, Zeus sent an embassy, but in vain it came.
Merciless was the great Earth Mother, who had been robbed of what she
held most dear.

"Give me back my child!" she said. "Gladly I watch the sufferings of
men, for no sorrow is as my sorrow. Give me back my child, and the
earth shall grow fertile once more."

Unwillingly Zeus granted the request of Demeter.

"She shall come back," he said at last, "and with thee dwell on earth
forever. Yet only on one condition do I grant thy fond request.
Persephone must eat no food through all the time of her sojourn in the
realm of Pluto, else must thy beseeching be all in vain."

Then did Demeter gladly leave Olympus and hasten down to the darkness
of the shadowy land that once again she might hold, in her strong
mother's arms, her who had once been her little clinging child.

But in the dark kingdom of Pluto a strange thing had happened. No
longer had the pale-faced god, with dark locks, and eyes like the
sunless pools of a mountain stream, any terrors for Proserpine. He was
strong, and cruel had she thought him, yet now she knew that the touch
of his strong, cold hands was a touch of infinite tenderness. When,
knowing the fiat of the ruler of Olympus, Pluto gave to his stolen
bride a pomegranate, red in heart as the heart of a man, she had taken
it from his hand, and, because he willed it, had eaten of the sweet
seeds. Then, in truth, it was too late for Demeter to save her child.
She "had eaten of Love's seed" and "changed into another."

 "He takes the cleft pomegranate seeds:
 'Love, eat with me this parting day;'
 Then bids them fetch the coal-black steeds--
 'Demeter's daughter, wouldst away?'
 The gates of Hades set her free;
 'She will return full soon,' saith he--
 'My wife, my wife Persephone.'"

 Ingelow.

Dark, dark was the kingdom of Pluto. Its rivers never mirrored a
sunbeam, and ever moaned low as an earthly river moans before a coming
flood, and the feet that trod the gloomy Cocytus valley were the feet
of those who never again would tread on the soft grass and flowers of
an earthly meadow. Yet when Demeter had braved all the shadows of
Hades, only in part was her end accomplished. In part only was
Proserpine now her child, for while half her heart was in the
sunshine, rejoicing in the beauties of earth, the other half was with
the god who had taken her down to the Land of Darkness and there had
won her for his own. Back to the flowery island of Sicily her mother
brought her, and the peach trees and the almonds blossomed snowily as
she passed. The olives decked themselves with their soft grey leaves,
the corn sprang up, green and lush and strong. The lemon and orange
groves grew golden with luscious fruit, and all the land was carpeted
with flowers. For six months of the year she stayed, and gods and men
rejoiced at the bringing back of Proserpine. For six months she left
her green and pleasant land for the dark kingdom of him whom she
loved, and through those months the trees were bare, and the earth
chill and brown, and under the earth the flowers hid themselves in
fear and awaited the return of the fair daughter of Demeter.

And evermore has she come and gone, and seedtime and harvest have
never failed, and the cold, sleeping world has awaked and rejoiced,
and heralded with the song of birds, and the bursting of green buds
and the blooming of flowers, the resurrection from the dead--the
coming of spring.







###
