It was when James the Sixth was king in Scotland that the young
Wemyss of Logie got into sore trouble.

Wemyss of Logie was one of the king's courtiers; a tall, handsome
lad he was, and a favourite with both king and queen.

Now King James had brought his wife, Queen Anne, across the sea
to Scotland. Her home was in Denmark, and when she came, a royal
bride, to Scotland, she brought with her a few fair Danish maids.
She thought it would be dull in her new home unless she had some
of her own country-folk around her.

Among these maids was a tall, beautiful girl named Margaret
Twynlace. Her the queen loved well, and oft would she speak with
Margaret of their old free life in the country over the sea.

It chanced on a day that the young Laird of Logie was in
attendance upon the king, and the Danish maid, Margaret Twynlace,
in waiting upon the queen; and that day they two looked at each
other, and yet another day they two talked to each other, indeed
many were the times they met. And before long it was well known
at court that the young Laird of Logie loved the Danish maid
Margaret, and would marry her an he could.

But now trouble befell the young laird. He had been seen talking
with the Earl of Bothwell, and he a traitor to the king. Nor was
it alone that Wemyss of Logie had been seen to speak with
Bothwell. It was even said that he had letters written by the
traitor in his room at Holyrood.

No sooner had this rumour reached the king than orders were given
to search both young Logie himself and the room in which he was
used to sleep.

On his person no letters were found, but in his room, flung
carelessly into his trunk, lay a packet of letters tied and
sealed. And the seal was that of the traitor, the Earl of
Bothwell.

The young laird was taken at once before the king. He spoke in
his usual fearless tones.

'It is true,' said he, 'that I have ofttimes spoken to the Earl
of Bothwell, and it is true that I received from him the sealed
packet which was found in my trunk. But of that which is written
in the packet know I nought. The seal is, as you see, unbroken.
Nor knew I that the earl was still acting as traitor,' added the
lad, as he saw displeasure written on the face of the king.

But despite all he could say, the young laird was arrested as a
traitor and thrown into prison. Margaret Twynlace with her own
eyes saw Sir John Carmichael, keeper of the prison, turn the key
in the lock.

Margaret went quickly to the queen's house, but there did she
neither sew nor sing. She sat twining her fingers in and out,
while she cried, 'Woe is me that ever I was born, or that ever I
left my home in Denmark. I would I had never seen the young Laird
of Logie.' And then Margaret wept bitterly, for having seen the
young laird, she loved him well.

When the queen came to her bower, she was grieved to see her
favourite maid in tears. Yet had she no comfort to offer her, for
well she knew that, even should he wish it, little power had the
king to save the young Laird of Logie.

But the queen spoke kindly to the maid, and told her that she,
Margaret, might e'en go herself to King James to beg for the life
of the young Laird of Logie. For it was well known that the
sentence passed on him would be death.

Then Margaret Twynlace wiped from her face all traces of her
tears. She put on her soft green silk gown, and she combed out
her bonny yellow hair. Thus she went into the presence of the
king and fell on her knee before him.

'Why, May Margaret,' said the king, 'is it thou? What dost thou
at my feet, my bonny maid?'

'Ah, sire,' cried she, 'I have come to beg of thee a boon. Nor
ever since I came over the sea have I begged of thee until now.
Give me, I beseech of thee, the life of the young Laird of
Logie.'

'Alas, May Margaret,' cried the king, 'that cannot I do! An thou
gavest to me all the gold that is in Scotland yet could I not
save the lad.'

Then Margaret Twynlace turned away and crept back to the queen's
bower. Yet now no tears fell from her blue eyes, for if neither
king nor queen could help the young Laird of Logie, she herself
would save him from death.

She would wait until night, when the king and queen slumbered,
and then she would carry out her plan. A brave plan it was, for
Margaret Twynlace was no coward maid.

Quiet and patient she waited in the little ante-room, close to
the queen's bedchamber, waited until she felt sure the royal pair
were fast asleep. Then tripping lightly on tiptoe, she stole
into the bedroom, where, as she had guessed, both king and queen
were slumbering sound.

She crossed the room, quiet as any mouse, and reached the toilet
table. There lay the king's gold comb, and close to it the little
pearl knife, the king's wedding gift to his queen.

Back tripped Margaret, still on tiptoe, to the ante-room, and
stood, her breath coming quick.

Had she roused the king or queen? Was that the bed creaking?

No, there was not a sound. The royal pair slept sound as before.

Then downstairs in the dark fled Margaret, down to the room where
Sir John Carmichael lay slumbering, without a thought of his
prisoner, the young Laird of Logie.

Loud did the maiden knock at his door, loud and long, until at
last Sir John was roused.

'Sir John,' cried the maid, 'haste thee and wake thy prisoner,
the young Laird of Logie, for the king would speak to him this
very moment. Open the door, for here be the tokens he sends to
thee,' and Margaret held out to Carmichael the gold comb and the
pearl knife.

Now, when Sir John had opened the door, he saw the tokens that
the maid held out to him. He knew them well and hastened to do
the king's will, rubbing his sleepy eyes the while, and muttering
under his breath, 'The king holds audience at strange hours; yet
must his orders be obeyed.'

He took the great key in his hand and went to the prison door.
Margaret followed close, her heart bounding, not wholly in fear,
nor yet wholly in hope.

Sir John turned the prison lock and roused the young Laird of
Logie from his dreams, saying only, 'The king would speak with
thee, without delay.'

Thus in the dead of night Margaret led the captain and his
prisoner to the door of the ante-room.

'Wait thou here, Sir John,' said the maid, until thy prisoner
returns.'

The young laird started as Margaret spoke. He had not guessed
that the maid wrapped in the rough cloak was his own dear
Margaret Twynlace.

But Sir John noticed nothing. He was wondering how long it would
be ere he would be again in his comfortable bed.

Margaret drew the prisoner into her own little room. He tried to
speak, but not a word would she let him utter. She led him to the
window, and shewed him a rope which she herself had fastened
there.

She pushed a purse of gold into his hand, a pistol into his belt,
and bade him shoot when he was free, that she might know that he
was safe. 'Then haste,' said Margaret, 'haste with all thy might
to the pier at Leith. Ships wilt thou find there in plenty to
carry thee into a safe haven.'

The young Laird of Logie would fain have tarried with the brave
Danish maid, but not a moment was there to lose. The king might
wake, Sir John might grow impatient and come in search of his
prisoner; thus whispered the maid as she urged young Wemyss of
Logie to flee.

He knew she spoke the truth, and he slipped down the rope, and in
a moment was standing on the ground. He hastened to the palace
gates, and getting safely through, he stayed only to fire his
pistol that Margaret Twynlace might know that no evil had
befallen.

When Margaret heard the shot she stole softly downstairs and
stood at the hall door gazing wistfully after the young Laird of
Logie. Yet not long dare she tarry there, lest the queen should
need her services. Noiselessly she crept back into the ante-room.
Hark! what was that? The king was moving! Indeed, the pistol-shot
had roused King James, and he jumped out of bed crying, 'That
pistol was fired by none other than the young Laird of Logie.'

He shouted for his guards and bade them go send their captain,
Sir John Carmichael, to his presence.

Sir John, fearing nothing, came before the king, and falling on
his knee before him he said, 'Sire, what is thy will?'

'Where is thy prisoner, where is the young Laird of Logie?'
demanded the king.

Sir John stared. Had not the king himself sent for his prisoner?

'The young Laird of Logie!' he said. 'Sire, thou didst send thy
tokens to me, a golden comb, a pearl knife. See, they are here,'
and Sir John drew them from his pocket and held them up before
the bewildered king.

'And with the tokens came an order to send my prisoner at once to
thy presence. I brought him to the door of the ante-room, where I
was bidden to wait thy will.'

'If thou hast played me false, Carmichael, if thou hast played me
false,' said the king, 'thou shalt thyself be tried to-morrow in
the court of justice in place of the prisoner, the young Laird of
Logie.'

Then Carmichael hastened to the door of the ante-room as fast as
ever he could go. And he called out, 'O young Wemyss of Logie, an
thou art within, come out, for I must speak to thee.'

Margaret Twynlace smiled to herself as she opened the door of the
ante-room. Carmichael stepped into the room, stopped short, and
stared. The open window, the rope that hung there, told him all
he had come to ask. He stared, but never a word did he find to
say.

Then maid Margaret laughed aloud and clapped her hands for glee.

'Dost wish thy prisoner, the Laird of Logie?' she cried. 'Thou
shalt not see him again for many a long day. Long ere the morning
dawned he was on board one of the ships at Leith, and now he is
sailing on the sea. He is free, he is free!'

King James did not punish the brave Danish maid. Nor when he
heard from Queen Anne all that the maid had done did he blame Sir
John Carmichael.

Indeed ere many months had passed away the king sent a pardon to
the young laird. Then was he not long in coming back to bonny
Scotland to marry brave Margaret Twynlace, who had saved his
life.﻿Once upon a time the youngest son of a king became filled with the
desire to go abroad and see the world. He got his father's permission to
depart, kissed his parents good-bye, mounted his black horse, and
galloped away down the high road. Soon the gray towers of the old castle
in which he was born hid themselves behind him.

The Prince journeyed on, spending the days in traveling, and the nights
in little wayside inns, till one day he found himself in the heart of
the Adamant Mountains. The great, red granite crags of the surrounding
peaks rose out of the gleaming snow like ugly fingers, and the slopes of
giant glaciers sparkled in the sun like torrents of diamonds. The Prince
sat down by some stunted trees whose tops had long before been broken
off by an avalanche, and began to eat the bit of bread and cheese which
he had stored in his pocket. His black horse, meanwhile, ate the grass
which grew here and there along the mountain path. And as the Prince sat
there in the bright sun and the silence of the mountains, he became
aware of a low, continuous roaring.

"There must be a waterfall near-by," said the Prince to himself. "I'll
go and see it."

So, casting another look at his steed, who was contentedly browsing, the
Prince climbed up the mountainside in the direction of the sound.

The Prince climbed and climbed, he went in this direction and in that,
yet the sound never grew any louder or fainter. Suddenly he realized
that he was hopelessly lost. The little path up which he had ridden had
vanished completely, and he had not the slightest idea in which
direction it lay. He called aloud, but only the mountain echoes answered
mockingly.

Night came, and the Prince took shelter behind a great rock. All the
next day he labored to find the path, but in vain. He grew very hungry
and cold. Every once in a while he would hear the roaring of the
waterfall, which seemed to have grown louder.

Another day dawned, and another day again. The Prince was getting very
weak. He knew that he was approaching the mysterious cataract, for the
noise of the water was now tremendous, and heaven and earth were full of
its roar. The third night came, and the full moon rose solemnly over the
snow-clad summits of the lonely and mysterious mountains. Suddenly the
Prince, walking blindly on, staggered through a narrow passage-way
between two splintered crags, and found himself face to face with the
mystery.

He stood on the snowy floor of a vast amphitheatre whose walls were the
steep sides of the giant mountains. Farthest away from him, and opposite
the moon, the wall of the bowl appeared as a giant black precipice,
whose top seemed to reach almost to the moon-dimmed stars; and over this
precipice a broad river was endlessly pouring, shining in the night like
the overflow of an ocean of molten silver. Though now very weak from
lack of food, and dizzy with the roaring of the cataract, the Prince
made his way to the shore of the foaming and eddying lake into which the
water was falling. Great was his surprise to discover that the overflow
of this lake disappeared into the earth through a long, low opening in
the cliff behind the fall. Greater still was his surprise to see a
strange many-colored light burning within the cave.

The Prince made his way toward the light, along a narrow beach of white
sand lying between the wall of the cavern and the racing waters of the
mysterious river, and found that the glow came from a magnificent
lantern studded with emeralds, topazes, amethysts, and rubies, which
hung by a chain from the roof of the grotto. Directly under this
lantern, drawn up on the sand, lay a little boat with a lantern fastened
to the bow. The Prince pushed the boat into the river, and got into it,
and the swift current seized him and hurried him away.

At first the cavern grew higher and wider; then it shrank again, and the
boat, borne along with incredible speed, shot down a rocky passageway
into the very heart of the earth. The passageway broadened once more,
and the boat rode gently through monstrous caves whose roofs were upheld
by twisted columns taller than the tallest tree. There were times when
all was so still that the Prince could easily have imagined himself back
in the solitude of the mountains; there were times when the foaming and
roaring of the underground river grew so deafening that the Prince
feared lest he might be approaching the brink of a subterranean
cataract.

Many hours passed. The Prince did not know whether it was night or day.
At length, while the boat was gliding through a vast hall, he fell
asleep. When he awoke, he found that the boat was floating on the black,
glassy surface of an immense underground ocean. All signs of the cavern
had disappeared. Far away, over the edge of this ocean, a strange,
beautiful glow mounted into the starless sky of the underworld. And
while the Prince was gazing at the glow, the boat swung into a new
current, and was borne swiftly toward the light. In a short time the
light grew so wide and bright that one would have believed that a
strange, golden sun had risen. The boat passed between two giant marble
pillars supporting enormous crystal globes filled with a golden fire,
and the Prince found himself in the harbor of Lantern Land.

A city lay before him, a strange golden city edging the shore of a vast,
semi-circular bay. Because in the centre of the earth there is neither
sun nor moon, the people have to be continually burning lights; and so
many and so great were the lanterns of Lantern Land that the town was as
bright as day. The edge of the harbor was marked with a row of golden
lanterns; there were immense lanterns at every six paces along the
streets; a lantern hung from every house; and the church-towers, instead
of having bells in them, had great golden lamps which illumined
everything for some distance about. Moreover, every inhabitant of
Lantern Land carried a lantern with him wherever he went, the rich
carrying golden lanterns set with transparent precious stones, the poor
carrying lights of ordinary glass.

Soon the Prince saw a magnificent ship coming out to meet him. The prow
was carved in the shape of a dragon's head, and a beautiful lantern hung
from its jaws. Overcome by hunger and fatigue, the poor Prince fell
insensible to the floor of his little boat. When he came to his senses
again, he was lying between sheets of the whitest, most delicate linen
in a great four-poster bed, in a room in the royal palace.

Thanks to his kind hosts, the Prince soon recovered his strength. When
he was completely himself again, he was summoned to an audience with the
Queen of Lantern Land.

The Queen, a very beautiful young woman, wearing a wonderful lantern
crown, sat on an ebony throne. On each side of the throne stood a tall
soldier, clad in scarlet and holding a long ebony staff surmounted by a
round lantern lit by a golden flame.

The Prince dropped on his knee, and thanked the Queen for her kindness
and hospitality.

"You are the first stranger to come to Lantern Land for a thousand
years," said the young Queen. "If it is not asking too much from a
guest, pray how did you happen to find the river of the underworld?"

So the Prince told her that he was a king's son, and described his
adventures in the mountains. You may be sure the Queen was glad to hear
of his royal birth, for she had fallen in love with him at first sight.

A month passed. The Prince remained a guest in the palace. All kinds of
festivities were given in his honor; there were wonderful dances,
masquerades, picnics, and theatricals going on all the time. One day the
Prince and the Queen, accompanied by a little group of courtiers, rode
to the frontier of Lantern Land. The lovers galloped ahead of the party
and reached a little hill beyond which there were no more lanterns.
Ahead of them the rolling land, sweeping farther and farther away from
the light, grew darker and darker, till it finally plunged into the
eternal night of the underworld.

The Prince looked at the Queen, and saw that she was weeping.

"Dear love, why do you weep?" asked the Prince, who felt sad to see
tears in his lady's lovely eyes.

"I weep to think that in spite of our love we must soon part forever,"
said the Queen.

"Part forever? Dear lady, what can you mean?" said the anxious Prince.

"A cruel fate hangs over us," replied the lady. "Know, dear Prince, that
I am promised in marriage to the Enchanter Dragondel, and that in
exactly eight days, he will come here to claim my hand."

"The Enchanter Dragondel--who is he?" said the Prince.

"Alas," said the Queen, "the Enchanter Dragondel is the most powerful
magician of all the underworld. He is about eight feet tall, has cruel
sunken eyes that burn like dull fires, and dresses entirely in black. We
met at a ball given by the King of the Goblins. Dragondel pursued me
with compliments. A few days afterwards, an iron boat arrived in the
port of Lantern Land, having on board a giant blue dog who is
Dragondel's younger brother. This terrible animal, from whose sight the
people of Lantern Land fled screaming, made his way to the palace, and
dropped at my feet a jeweled casket, which he carried between his jaws.
The casket contained Dragondel's request for my hand, and added that,
were I to refuse him, he would let loose a legion of ghosts and other
winged spirits against the lanterns of Lantern Land. I had a vision of
Lantern Land in darkness; of my poor subjects dying of fear and
starvation. Rather than let this vision come true, I accepted the
Enchanter. Soon I shall never see you again, for Dragondel will come and
take me to his awful castle which lies on an island in the dark ocean.
Nor will you ever be able to save me, for Dragondel has so bewitched the
waves that a terrible whirlpool forms on the sea when a boat approaches
the enchanted castle, and engulfs it."

"But I can fight Dragondel," said the Prince, like the brave youth that
he was.

"That would be of little use," replied the Queen, "for you would be
changed into a stone the instant you crossed swords with him. Tomorrow,
the blue dog arrives to remind me of my obligation, and to carry back to
the island some of the palace servants who are to make Dragondel's
castle ready for my coming."

The other members of the party now rode up, and the Queen dabbed her
eyes with her handkerchief, and pretended not to have been crying. The
Prince and the Queen felt very unhappy as they rode home.

On the next day, sure enough, the iron boat arrived, and the blue dog,
who was as large as a lion, went to the Queen's palace, and bade her
make ready for the coming wedding. A dozen of the Queen's servants were
then ordered to go with the blue dog to Dragondel's castle. Among these
servants, disguised as a kitchen lad, was the Prince; for he had
determined to see if there was not some way in which the young Queen
could be rescued from the wicked magician.

The boat neared the island, but no terrible whirlpool formed in the
enchanted sea. At last the boat reached Dragondel's castle. It stood on
the top of a high lonely rock against whose steep sides the waves of the
underground ocean were forever foaming and breaking, and it was half in
ruins and was very poorly lighted.

The Prince took his place in the kitchen, and sought for an opportunity
to prevent the marriage of Dragondel and the Queen.

For four days of the precious week, however, the poor Prince was kept so
busy baking and making pastries for the coming of the bride that he did
not have an instant to ask questions or do anything else.

In the morning hours of the fifth day there was a terrible moaning and
roaring outside, and the cooks rushed to the kitchen windows. An unhappy
fishing boat had been swept by the wind too near Dragondel's castle, the
enchanted whirlpool had formed, and caught the boat in its awful circle.
Now it went slowly round the outer edge, now, going faster and faster,
it slid down the side of the awful funnel, and finally it vanished. An
instant later, the whirlpool had disappeared, leaving the sea roaring
and foaming.

The Prince shuddered.

"Well you may shudder," said the chief cook, "for such would have been
your fate if our master's brother had not carried with him the talisman
which rules the whirlpool."

"Talisman? What talisman?" said the Prince affecting stupidity.

"Why the little golden hand, you fool," said the chief cook.

"My! it must be a great big hand to be able to quiet that whirlpool,"
said the Prince.

"Big indeed, you ninny!" growled the cook. "Why, the magic hand is only
as big as a baby's hand. I've seen it many times. The master carries it
in his pocket, and puts it under his pillow while he sleeps."

So, later on, when his work was done, and everybody had gone to bed, the
Prince, in the hope of stealing the talisman, tried to make his way to
Dragondel's bedchamber. But when he reached the foot of the stairs which
led to the Enchanter's room, he found it guarded by two black panthers
which stared at him with insolent yellow eyes and switched their long
tails. The Prince went outdoors, to see if there was any hope of
climbing to the room along the outer wall, and found that the windows of
Dragondel's chamber overlooked a cliff falling thousands of feet sheer
to the dark sea. Far, far away, the Prince saw the glow of Lantern Land.
Only a short time remained to him in which to save his beloved lady of
the lanterns.

As he wandered about, very sick at heart, he saw a little black cat
running madly back and forth along the edge of a steep cliff from one of
whose crevices came a persistent, unhappy mewing. The poor cat was a
mother-cat, and was trying to rescue a kitten of hers that had fallen
down between the rocks. At great risk of being dashed to pieces himself,
the brave Prince climbed down the precipice, rescued the kitten, and
gave it back to its anxious mother.

"Thank you, brave youth," said the old cat.

"May it some day be within my power to help you as you have helped me."

"You can help me this very moment," said the Prince. And he told the cat
who he was, why he had come to the castle, and of his desire to get
possession of the talisman.

"I will help you get the talisman," said the cat. "The panthers will let
me pass, for they are cousins of mine. But you must make another little
golden hand to take the place of the one I shall steal; for if Dragondel
misses the golden hand, he will summon his demons to find it, and we
shall both lose our lives. Go now to the kitchen, carve a small hand
with the fingers close together and the thumb lying close to the
fingers, gild it over with the gold dust you have had given you for the
pastry icings, and bring it to me tomorrow night at this very hour."

So the Prince worked the rest of the night carving and gilding the
little golden hand, and on the next night he gave it to the cat. The cat
took it in her mouth as she would have a mouse, walked coolly by the
panthers, and entered Dragondel's room. She had just succeeded in
getting the true hand out from under the magician's pillow when
Dragondel woke up. The cat was clever enough to pretend to be engaged in
a mouse-hunt, so the Enchanter paid no attention to her and fell asleep
once more. When the cat, however, got under Dragondel's couch again, the
two hands lay side by side and she could not remember just which one was
the talisman and which one the false hand. So because she had to act
quickly, she put one of the hands under the pillow, brought the other to
the Prince and told him her story. But so well matched were the little
hands, that even the Prince was far from certain that he had not got his
own hand back again.

And now came the seventh day, the day on which Dragondel, the blue dog,
and all the wicked Enchanter's friends were to sail to Lantern Land for
the marriage ceremony. The iron ship, made gay with a thousand small
scarlet lanterns, stood ready to carry them over. The Enchanter and his
company got in, and the vessel left the island.

The Prince stood watching the ship from the top of the cliffs. What
anxiety was in his heart! If Dragondel still possessed the true
talisman, he would cross the whirlpool safely, and marry the beautiful
Queen of Lantern Land.

The vessel sped on. It was now at some distance from the island.

"All is lost," thought the Prince with a sinking heart; "Dragondel has
the true talisman." And in his bitterness he was about to throw the
little golden hand which lay in his pocket down into the sea.

Suddenly the air became filled with a terrible moaning; the sea became
troubled; the whirlpool awoke. And the Prince saw the red lights of the
Enchanter's ship whirled round and round, faster and faster, till they
disappeared forever in the waters of the sunless sea.

As for the Prince, he soon found another boat, and taking with him the
talisman, his fellow servants, and the black cat and her kittens, he
returned to Lantern Land, married the Queen, and lived happily ever
after.





###
