Once upon a time there lived a king and queen , who had an only
daughter . Her incomparable beauty , sweetness , and intelligence caused
her to be named Graciosa . She was all her mother's joy . Every day she
had given her a different dress , of gold brocade , velvet , or satin;
yet she was neither conceited nor boastful . She used to pass her
mornings in study , and in the afternoon she sat sewing by the queen's
side . She had , however , plenty of play-time , and sweetmeats without
end , so that she was altogether the happiest princess alive . 

At the same court was an elderly young lady named Duchess Grognon , who
was the very opposite of Graciosa . Her hair was fiery red , her face
fat and spotty , and she had but one eye . Her mouth was so big that you
might have thought she could eat you up , only she had no teeth to do
it with; she was also humpbacked and lame . Of course she could not
help her ugliness , and nobody would have disliked her for that , if she
had not been of such an unpleasant temper that she hated everything
sweet and beautiful , and especially Graciosa . She had also a very good
opinion of herself , and when any one praised the princess , would say
angrily , "That is a lie ! My little finger is worth her whole body . "

In course of time the queen fell sick and died , and her daughter was
almost broken-hearted . So was her husband for a year , and then he
began to comfort himself by hunting . One day , after a long chase , he
came to a strange castle , which happened to be that of the Duchess
Grognon . She , informed of his approach , went out to meet him , and
received him most respectfully . As he was very hot with hunting , she
took him into the coolest place in the palace , which was a vaulted
cave , most elegantly furnished , where there were two hundred barrels
arranged in long rows . 

"Madam , are these all yours ? " inquired the king . 

"Yes , sire , but I shall be most happy if you will condescend to taste
their contents . Which wine do you prefer--canary , hermitage , 
champagne ? " and she ran over a long list , out of which his majesty
made his choice . 

Grognon took a little hammer , and struck "toc , toc , " on the cask , from
which there rolled out a handful of silver money . "Nay , what is this ? "
said she , smiling , and passed on to the next , from which , when she
tapped it , out poured a stream of gold coins . "I never saw the
like--what nonsense ! " and she tried the third , out of which came a
heap of pearls and diamonds , so that the floor of the cave was strewn
with them . "Sire , " she exclaimed , "some one has robbed me of my good
wine , and put this rubbish in its place . "

"Rubbish , madam ! Why , such rubbish would buy my whole kingdom . "

"It is yours , sire , " replied the duchess , "if you will make me your
queen . "

The king , who was a great lover of money , replied eagerly , "Certainly , 
madam , I'll marry you to-morrow if you will . "

Grognon , highly delighted , made but one other condition--that she
should have the Princess Graciosa entirely in her own rule and power , 
just as if she had been her real mother; to which the foolish king
consented , for he thought much more of riches than he did of his
child . So he and Grognon departed hand in hand out of the cave , very
well pleased . 

When the king returned home , Graciosa ran out with joy to welcome her
father , and asked him if he had had good sport in his hunting . 

"Yes , my child , " said he , "for I have taken a dove alive . "

"Oh , give it me , and I will nourish and cherish it , " cried the
princess . 

"That is impossible; for it is the Duchess Grognon , whom I have
promised to marry . "

"She a dove ! --she is rather a hawk , " sighed the princess in despair;
but her father bade her hold her tongue , and promise to love her
stepmother , who would have over her all the authority of a mother , and
to whom he wished to present her that very day . 

The obedient princess went to her apartment , where her nurse soon
found out the sorrow in her face , and its cause . 

"My child , " said the good old woman , "princesses ought to show a good
example to humbler women . Promise me to do your best to please your
father , and to make yourself agreeable to the stepmother he has
chosen for you . She may not be so bad after , all . "

And the nurse gave so much good advice , that Graciosa began to smile , 
and dressed herself in her best attire , a green robe embroidered with
gold; while her fair , loose-falling hair was adorned , according to the
fashion of the day , with a coronet of jasmine , of which the leaves
were made of large emeralds . 

Grognon , on her part , made the best of herself that was possible . She
put on a high-heeled shoe to appear less lame , she padded her
shoulders , dyed her red hair black , and put in a false eye; then
dressed herself in a hooped petticoat of violet satin trimmed with
blue , and an upper gown of yellow with green ribands . In this costume , 
she wished to enter the city on horseback , as she understood the
queens were in the habit of doing . 

Meantime , Graciosa waited in fear the moment of her arrival , and , to
pass the time away , she went all alone into a little wood , where she
sobbed and wept in secret , until suddenly there appeared before her a
young page , whom she had never seen before . 

"Who are you ? " she inquired; "and when did his majesty take you into
his service ? "

"Princess , " said the page , bowing , "I am in no one's service but your
own . I am Percinet , a prince in my own country , so that there is no
inequality of rank between us . I have loved you long , and seen you
often , for I have the fairy gift of making myself invisible . I might
longer have concealed myself from you , but for your present sorrow , 
in which , however , I hope to be of both comfort and assistance--a page
and yet a prince , and your faithful lover . "

At these words , at once tender and respectful , the princess , who had
long heard of the fairy-prince Percinet , felt so happy that she feared
Grognon no more . They talked a little while together , and then
returned to the palace , where the page assisted her to mount her
horse; on which she looked so beautiful , that all the new queen's
splendours faded into nothing in comparison , and not one of the
courtiers had eyes for any except Graciosa . 

As soon as Grognon saw it , "What ! " cried she , "has this creature the
impudence to be better mounted than myself ! Descend , Miss , and let me
try your horse;--and your page , whom everybody thinks so much of , bid
him come and hold my bridle . "

Prince Percinet , who was the page , cast one look at his fair Graciosa
and obeyed; but no sooner had the duchess mounted , than the horse ran
away with her and dragged her over briers , stones , and mud , and
finally threw her into a deep ditch . Her head was cut in several
places , and her arm fractured . They picked her up in little pieces , 
like a broken wineglass; never was there a poor bride in worse plight . 
But in spite of her sufferings her malice remained . She sent for the
king:

"This is all Graciosa's fault; she wished to kill me . I desire that
your majesty will punish her , or leave me to do it--else I will
certainly be revenged upon you both . "

The king , afraid of losing his casks full of gold pieces , consented , 
and Graciosa was commanded to appear . She came trembling and looking
round vainly for Prince Percinet . The cruel Grognon ordered four
women , ugly as witches , to take her and strip off her fine clothes , 
and whip her with rods till her white shoulders were red with blood . 
But lo ! as soon as the rods touched her , they turned into bundles of
feathers , and the women tired themselves to death with whipping , 
without hurting Graciosa the least in the world ! 

"Ah ! kind Percinet , what do I not owe you ? What should I do without
you ! " sighed the princess , when she was taken back to her own chamber
and her nurse . And then she saw the prince standing before her , in his
green dress and his white plume , the most charming of pages . 

Percinet advised her to pretend illness on account of the cruel
treatment she was supposed to have received; which so delighted
Grognon , that she got well all the sooner , and the marriage was
celebrated with great splendour . 

Soon after , the king , who knew that his wife's weak point was her
vanity , gave a tournament , at which he ordered the six bravest knights
of the court to proclaim that Queen Grognon was the fairest lady
alive . No knight ventured to dispute this fact , until there appeared
one who carried a little box adorned with diamonds , and proclaimed
aloud that Grognon was the ugliest woman in the universe , and that the
most beautiful was she whose portrait was in the box . He opened it , 
and behold the image of the Princess Graciosa ! 

The princess , who sat behind her stepmother , felt sure that the
unknown knight was Percinet; but she dared say nothing . The contest
was fixed for next day; but in the meantime , Grognon , wild with anger , 
commanded Graciosa to be taken in the middle of the night to a forest
a hundred leagues distant , full of wolves , lions , tigers , and bears . 
In vain the poor maiden implored that the attendants would kill her at
once , rather than leave her in that dreadful place: the queen's orders
must be obeyed; no answer was made to her , but the servants remounted
and rode away . Graciosa , in solitude and darkness , groped through the
forest , sometimes falling against the trunks of trees , sometimes
tearing herself with bushes and briers; at last , overcome with fear
and grief , she sank on the ground , sobbing out , "Percinet , Percinet , 
have you forsaken me ? "

While she spoke , a bright light dazzled her eyes , the midnight forest
was changed into glittering alleys , at the end of which appeared a
palace of crystal , shining like the sun . She knew it was the doing of
the fairy-prince who loved her , and felt a joy mingled with fear . She
turned to fly , but saw him standing before her , more handsome and
charming than ever . 

"Princess , " said he , "why are you afraid of me ? This is the palace of
the fairy-queen my mother , and the princesses my sisters , who will
take care of you , and love you tenderly . Enter this chariot , and I
will convey you there . "

Graciosa entered , and passing through many a lovely forest glade , 
where it was clear daylight , and shepherds and shepherdesses were
dancing to merry music , they reached the palace , where the queen and
her two daughters received the forlorn princess with great kindness , 
and led her through many rooms of rock-crystal , glittering with
jewels , where , to her amazement , Graciosa saw the history of her own
life , even down to this adventure in the forest , painted on the walls . 

"How is this ? " she said . "Prince , you know everything about me . "

"Yes; and I wish to preserve everything concerning you , " said he
tenderly; whereupon Graciosa cast down her eyes . She was only too
happy , and afraid that she should learn to love the fairy-prince too
much . 

She spent eight days in his palace--days full of every enjoyment; and
Percinet tried all the arguments he could think of to induce her to
marry him , and remain there for ever . But the good and gentle Graciosa
remembered her father who was once so kind to her , and she preferred
rather to suffer than to be wanting in duty . She entreated Percinet to
use his fairy power to send her home again , and meantime to tell her
what had become of her father . 

"Come with me into the great tower there , and you shall see for
yourself . "

Thereupon he took her to the top of a tower , prodigiously high , put
her little finger to his lips , and her foot upon his foot . Then he
bade her look , and she saw as hi a picture , or as in a play upon the
stage , the King and Grognon sitting together on their throne . The
latter was telling how Graciosa had hanged herself in a cave . 

"She will not be much loss , sire; and as , when dead , she was far too
frightful for you to look at , I have given orders to bury her at
once . "

She might well say that , for she had had a large faggot put into a
coffin , and sealed up; the king and all the nation mourned over it;
and now , that she was no more , they declared there never was such a
sweet creature as the lost princess . 

The sight of her father's grief quite overcame Graciosa . "Oh , 
Percinet ! " she cried , "my father believes me dead . If you love me , 
take me home . "

The prince consented , though very sorrowfully , saying that she was as
cruel to him as Grognon was to her , and mounted with her in his
chariot , drawn by four white stags . As they quitted the courtyard , 
they heard a great noise , and Graciosa saw the palace all falling to
pieces with a great crash . 

"What is this ? " she cried , terrified . 

"Princess , my palace , which you forsake , is among the things which are
dead and gone . You will enter it no more till after your burial . "

"Prince , you are angry with me , " said Graciosa sorrowfully; only she
knew well that she suffered quite as much as he did in thus departing
and quitting him . 

Arrived in her father's presence , she had great difficulty in
persuading him that she was not a ghost , until the coffin with the
faggot inside it was taken up , and Grognon's malice discovered But
even then , the king was so weak a man , that the queen soon made him
believe he had been cheated , that the princess was really dead , and
that this was a false Graciosa . Without more ado , he abandoned his
daughter to her stepmother's will . 

Grognon , transported with joy , dragged her to a dark prison , took away
her clothes , made her dress in rags , feed on bread and water , and
sleep upon straw . Forlorn and hopeless , Graciosa dared not now call
upon Percinet; she doubted if he still loved her enough to come to her
aid . 

Meantime , Grognon had sent for a fairy , who was scarcely less
malicious than herself . "I have here , " said she , "a little wretch of a
girl for whom I wish to find all sorts of difficult tasks; pray assist
me in giving her a new one every day . "

The fairy promised to think of it , and soon brought a skein as thick
as four persons , yet composed of thread so fine , that it broke if you
only blew upon it , and so tangled that it had neither beginning nor
end . Grognon , delighted , sent for her poor prisoner . 

"There , miss , teach your clumsy fingers to unwind this skein , and if
you break a single thread I will flay you alive . Begin when you like , 
but you must finish at sunset , or it will be the worse for you . " Then
she sent her to her miserable cell , and treble-locked the door . 

Graciosa stood dismayed , turning the skein over and over , and breaking
hundreds of threads each time . "Ah ! Percinet , " she cried in despair , 
"come and help me , or at least receive my last farewell . "

Immediately Percinet stood beside her , having entered the cell as
easily as if he carried the key in his pocket . "Behold me , princess , 
ready to serve you , even though you forsook me . " He touched the skein
with his wand , and it untangled itself , and wound itself up in perfect
order . "Do you wish anything more , madam ? " asked he coldly . 

"Percinet , Percinet , do not reproach me; I am only too unhappy . "

"It is your own fault . Come with me , and make us both happy . " But she
said nothing , and the fairy-prince disappeared . 

At sunset , Grognon eagerly came to the prison-door with her three
keys , and found Graciosa smiling and fair , her task all done . There
was no complaint to make , yet Grognon exclaimed that the skein was
dirty , and boxed the princess's ears till her rosy cheeks turned
yellow and blue . Then she left her , and overwhelmed the fairy with
reproaches . 

"Find me , by to-morrow , something absolutely impossible for her to
do . "

The fairy brought a great basket full of feathers , plucked from every
kind of bird--nightingales , canaries , linnets , larks , doves , thrushes , 
peacocks , ostriches , pheasants , partridges , magpies , eagles--in fact , 
if I told them all over , I should never come to an end; and all these
feathers were so mixed up together , that they could not be
distinguished . 

"See , " said the fairy , "even one of ourselves would find it difficult
to separate these , and arrange them as belonging to each sort of bird . 
Command your prisoner to do it; she is sure to fail . "

Grognon jumped for joy , sent for the princess , and ordered her to take
her task , and finish it , as before , by set of sun . 

Graciosa tried patiently , but she could see no difference in the
feathers; she threw them all back again into the basket , and began to
weep bitterly . "Let me die , " said she , "for death only will end my
sorrows . Percinet loves me no longer; if he did , he would already have
been here . "

"Here I am , my princess , " cried a voice from under the basket; and the
fairy-prince appeared . He gave three taps with his wand--the feathers
flew by millions out of the basket , and arranged themselves in little
heaps , each belonging to a different bird . 

"What do I not owe you ? " cried Graciosa . 

"Love me ! " answered the prince , tenderly , and said no more . 

When Grognon arrived , she found the task done . She was furious at the
fairy , who was as much astonished as herself at the result of their
malicious contrivances . But she promised to try once more; and for
several days employed all her industry in inventing a box , which , she
said , the prisoner must be forbidden on any account to open . "Then , "
added the cunning fairy , "of course , being such a disobedient and
wicked girl , as you say , she will open it , and the result will
satisfy you to your heart's content . "

Grognon took the box , and commanded Graciosa to carry it to her
castle , and set it on a certain table , in an apartment she named , but
not upon any account , to open it or examine its contents . 

Graciosa departed . She was dressed like any poor peasant , in a cotton
gown , a woollen hood and wooden shoes; yet , as she walked along , 
people took her for a queen in disguise , so lovely were her looks and
ways . But being weak with imprisonment , she soon grew weary , and , 
sitting down upon the edge of a little wood , took the box upon her
lap . Suddenly a wonderful desire seized her to open it . 

"I will take nothing out , I will touch nothing , " said she to herself , 
"but I must see what is inside . "

Without reflecting on the consequences , she lifted up the lid , and
instantly there jumped out a number of little men and little women , 
carrying little tables and chairs , little dishes , and little musical
instruments . The whole company were so small , that the biggest giant
among them was scarcely the height of a finger . They leaped into the
green meadow , separated into various bands , and began dancing and
singing , eating and drinking , to Graciosa's wonder and delight . But
when she recollected herself , and wished to get them into the box
again , they all scampered away , played at hide-and-seek in the wood , 
and by no means could she catch a single one . 

Again , in her distress , she called upon Percinet , and again he
appeared; and , with a single touch of his wand , sent all the little
people back into the box . Then , in his chariot , drawn by stags , he
took her to the castle , where she did all that she had been commanded , 
and returned in safety , to her stepmother , who was more furious than
ever . If a fairy could be strangled , Grognon certainly would have done
it in her rage . At last , she resolved to ask help no more , but to work
her own wicked will upon Graciosa . 

She caused to be dug a large hole in the garden , and taking the
princess there , showed her the stone which covered it . 

"Underneath this stone lies a great treasure; lift it up , and you will
see . "

Graciosa obeyed; and while she was standing at the edge of the pit , 
Grognon pushed her in , and let the stone fall down again upon her , 
burying her alive . After this , there seemed no more hope for the poor
princess . 

"O Percinet , " cried she , "you are avenged . Why did I not return your
love , and marry you ! Still , death will be less bitter , if only you
regret me a little . "

While she spoke , she saw through the blank darkness a glimmer of
light; it came through a little door . She remembered what Percinet had
said: that she would never return to the fairy palace , until after she
was buried . Perhaps this final cruelty of Grognon would be the end of
her sorrows . So she took courage , crept through the little door , and
lo ! she came out into a beautiful garden , with long alleys , 
fruit-trees , and flower-beds . Well she knew it , and well she knew the
glitter of the rock-crystal walls . And there , at the palace-gate , 
stood Percinet , and the queen , his mother , and the princesses , his
sisters . "Welcome , Graciosa ! " cried they all; and Graciosa , after all
her sufferings , wept for joy . 

The marriage was celebrated with great splendour; and all the fairies , 
for a thousand leagues round , attended it . Some came in chariots drawn
by dragons , or swans , or peacocks; some were mounted upon floating
clouds , or globes of fire . Among the rest , appeared the very fairy who
had assisted Grognon to torment Graciosa . When she discovered that
Grognon's poor prisoner was now Prince Percinet's bride , she was
overwhelmed with confusion , and entreated her to forget all that had
passed , because she really was ignorant who she had been so cruelly
afflicting . 

"But I will make amends for all the evil that I have done , " said the
fairy; and , refusing to stay for the wedding-dinner , she remounted her
chariot , drawn by two terrible serpents , and flew to the palace of
Graciosa's father . There , before either king , or courtiers , or
ladies-in-waiting could stop her--even had they wished to do it , which
remains doubtful--she came behind the wicked Grognon , and twisted her
neck , just as a cook does a barn-door fowl . So Grognon died and was
buried , and nobody was particularly sorry for the same . 


