Once upon a time, in a country of mountains which bordered upon the sea,
dwelt a rich merchant who had three sons. The eldest and the second-born
were his joy, for they were merchants too, and remained at his side; but
the youngest often caused him much anxiety. Not that this youngest son
was a wild or a bad lad; but love of the sea and desire for adventure
ran like fire in his veins, and he could not bring himself to sit beside
his father and his brothers in the counting-house.

Weary at length of the constant reproaches of his kinsmen, he turned
away one night from his father's house and joined a ship as a common
sailor. Clad in sailor blue, wearing a little cap, a blouse open at the
throat, and trousers cut wide at the bottoms, the runaway lad sailed
over the sea to foreign lands and isles. And as the years passed, one by
one, and brought no tidings of him, his father and his brothers gave him
up for lost.

Now the King of the country in which the rich merchant and his son dwelt
loved rare gems and precious stones more than anything else in the
world. Hidden secretly away in the deep foundations of his castle lay
his treasure-room: it was circular in shape and built of black marble,
and at equal distance one from the other, along the curving wall, stood
a hundred statues of armed men, holding ever-burning lights. A hundred
coffers of green stone lay on the floor, one at the base of each statue,
each coffer piled high with gems.

Night after night, when all was still, the King would descend to the
secret chamber, and throwing open the covers of the jewel-chests, would
gaze long and silently into the gleaming mass within.

One night the King led his neighbor, the Emperor of the Seven Isles, to
the jewel-room, and showed him his treasures.

"Are there fairer jewels to be found in the whole wide world?" said the
King proudly.

"They are indeed noble," replied the Emperor, nodding his gray head.
"But how happens it that the Emerald of the Sea is not among them? The
Emerald of the Sea is the most glorious jewel in the whole wide world.
Years ago a fisherman of the Land of the Dawn found it in a strangely
carved box which a storm had washed into his nets. I saw it when I was
but a young prince; it hung by a chain from the throat of the Princess
of the Dawn, and shone there as if the very secret of the sea were
hidden in its heart."

"Where is this emerald to be found?" asked the King, who was consumed
with the desire to add the jewel to his possessions. "Tell me, that I
may at once send an expedition in search of it."

"I have not heard of it for many a long year," replied the Emperor, "but
I think it is still in the Land of the Dawn."

So great was the King's impatience to become the owner of the Emerald of
the Sea, that he could scarcely wait for the morning. All night long he
slept not a wink for thinking of it, and hardly had the red shield of
the morning sun risen above the thin mists lying at the edge of the sea
and sky, when he sent for the rich merchant to come to the palace at
once.

Wondering much at the summons, the merchant made haste to the palace,
and was there taken instantly before the King. When the King saw him, he
said:--

"You are the greatest and richest merchant in my dominions. Know, then,
that I have a task worthy of you. In the Land of the Dawn there is a
jewel called the Emerald of the Sea; it is your task to discover it and
purchase it for me. To possess it, I would give all the gold in my
realm. Take heed that you return with it, for if you fail me, my anger
shall strike you down."

At these words the merchant bowed low, and replied that he would that
very day sail for the Land of the Dawn in his fastest ship. Then,
returning home, he gave orders that the best vessel in all his fleets be
immediately prepared for the journey; and so swiftly was this done, that
the merchant sailed for the Land of the Dawn on the morning tide.

Many days and many leagues he sailed, over shining seas, till he reached
the harbor of the Land of the Dawn. Ships were entering and ships were
leaving the lovely mountain-circled bay. How the broad sails tugged at
their ropes as a steady wind filled their curving white depths! How
silver-clear shone the furrows of foam flowing back from the
onward-hurrying bows!

Making her way out toward the great, still mirror of the summer sea, was
a strange black vessel, with sails as red as fire.

The merchant anchored his ship in a quiet bay, and hastened ashore to
find the Lord Treasurer of the Kingdom. He found this nobleman at ease
on a balcony of his castle which overlooked the sea. Upon hearing the
merchant's story, the nobleman started with surprise, and said:--

"You are just too late! At the command of my royal master, the Prince of
the Land of the Dawn, I sold the Emerald of the Sea only an hour ago to
the master of a strange vessel. See, there she is now." And the Lord
Treasurer pointed out over the sea to the black ship with the red sails,
which was just then disappearing over the horizon.

Thankful that the other ship was still in sight, the merchant hurried
back to his own vessel and gave chase. Luckily for him, there was a full
moon that night, by which the shadowy hulk and the swaying masts of the
mysterious ship could be seen.

All the next day they sailed, but never an inch nearer to the other
vessel did they come, though the merchant loaded his ship with all the
canvas she could bear. Another night and another day found them no
nearer. Finally, late in the afternoon of the third day, a great storm
came sailing over the edge of the sea; a blast of wind struck the
merchant's ship, then a torrent of rain, and night came on just as the
storm was at its height.

When the daylight came again, the other ship had completely disappeared;
and though the worried merchant sailed here and sailed there, never a
sign of the stranger could he find. At last, with a heavy heart, he gave
up the quest and returned to his King with the evil tidings.

The King, I hardly need say, was beside himself with rage and
disappointment. Scowling so terribly that his eyebrows almost met, he
cried to the merchant:--

"Wretch, through you I have lost the finest jewel in the world! If you
do not find it within a year, your life and your possessions shall be
forfeited to me."

On hearing these terrible words, the merchant turned pale, for he had no
more idea where the Emerald of the Sea was to be found than had a
new-born child. His two sons, however, when they had heard his story,
bade him not to despair, and declared that they would that very night go
forth and seek the emerald through the world.

Now, because the poor merchant could not bear to be left quite alone, it
was finally agreed that only the eldest son should go in search of the
jewel, while the second-born should remain at home. This, of course, was
much against the will of the second son; nevertheless, so it was
arranged.

And so the eldest son sailed away. The days lengthened into weeks, the
weeks into months, the months into a year, yet the eldest son did not
return. A guard of soldiers led the unhappy merchant before the King.

"Well, have you found the Emerald of the Sea?" said the King.

"No," replied the merchant, hopelessly. And now all would certainly have
been over with the poor merchant, had not his second son begged and
pleaded with the King for a year of respite in which he, too, might
search for the emerald through the world. Though at first unwilling, the
King at length yielded to the plea, but exacted one half of the
merchant's possessions as a forfeit.

And so the second son sailed away. Days lengthened into weeks, weeks
lengthened into months, the months into a year, yet the second son did
not return. Cruel storms wrecked so many of the merchant's ships that he
lost the other half of his possessions, and was forced to take refuge in
a miserable cottage by the marshes beyond the town.

On the last night of the year granted to him by the King, the unhappy
man sat in his poor house by a crumbling driftwood fire, listening to
the surf breaking on the beach that edged the marsh. Far away, he heard
the bells of the royal city sound the midnight hour. Neither the eldest
son nor the second-born had returned. The second year of respite was at
an end; nothing now could stay the anger of the King.

Suddenly there came a vigorous rat-tat-tat on the door.

"I am lost," murmured the poor merchant to himself. "The King's soldiers
are already at the door." And advancing unsteadily across the room, he
threw the door open wide.

A gust of wind from the sea blew in, which bent back the flame of the
taper in his hand, and then across the threshold stepped the youngest
son. He was still a sailor and clad in sailor blue, and there was a
cutlass in his belt. So shaken with joy was the merchant that for some
time he could not utter a word, but merely clung to the strong shoulders
of the young seaman.

As for the sailor son, he managed to let his father know that he had
returned from distant lands only that very evening, and had just heard
of the disasters which had overtaken his family.

As they talked, steps were heard outside; and then, without waiting to
knock, a sergeant of the King's guard forced open the door, and,
followed by a handful of soldiers, entered the wretched room and took
the merchant and his son prisoners. They spent the night on the straw in
the royal dungeons, and in the morning were led before the King.

On seeing the merchant, the irate King scowled more angrily than
ever,--for the loss of the Emerald of the Sea had never ceased from
troubling him,--and said:--

"Well, have you found the Emerald of the Sea?"

"No," said the poor merchant.

"Summon the executioner!" cried the King.

And now the poor man would certainly have bade farewell to earth, had
not the youngest son, like his brothers, interceded with the King.

At first the King would hear not a word of it, and called to his guard
to take the prisoners instantly away; but it being whispered that the
sailor, although not much more than a lad, had once fought bravely and
been sorely wounded in the royal service, he at length gave ear to the
youngest son's prayer and said:--

"Yes, you shall have another year. But know that this year shall be the
last. If you do not return with the Emerald of the Sea within a
twelvemonth, nothing shall save you. I have spoken."

And thus the sailor son went in search of the Emerald. What happened to
him upon his search, in what situation he discovered his brothers, and
how he visited the City under the Sea, you shall shortly hear.

Now the youngest son had a little boat of his own. It was so small that,
when the wind no longer filled its sails, it could be rowed along, and
in this boat the sailor lad began his voyage. From harbor to harbor,
from nation to nation, he sailed, but never a soul he found who could
tell him aught of the strange black ship with the fiery sails or the
lost Emerald of the Sea. Even the people of the Land of the Dawn could
tell him only that the gem had been sold to an unknown prince.

Presently the winter of the year overtook him, and in one of the sudden
storms that heralded the coming of the cold, his little boat went ashore
on a rocky coast, and was soon pounded to pieces by the breakers. Thrown
into the sea during the wreck, the sailor was himself so tossed and
trampled by the waves that he reached the shore far more dead than
alive. Indeed, had it not been for a poor fisherman and his wife, there
would have been no more story to tell. These good people, I am glad to
say, rescued the sailor from the fury of the waters and nursed him back
to health and strength again.

When his strength was quite restored, the sailor told this good couple
the story of how he had gone forth to seek through the wide world the
Emerald of the Sea.

"But my poor lad," said the kind fisherman, "the Emerald of the Sea has
vanished forever from mortal eyes."

"What! You know of the emerald?" cried the sailor.

"Alas, yes," replied the fisherman. "Two years ago the Prince of the
Dawn to buy the jewel. A beautiful ship was she, with a hull as black as
night and sails as red as fire. My brother and I sailed in her crew. The
jewel was taken aboard. Our brave ship set sail for the Unknown Isles.
Hardly were we three days out of the sight of land, when a storm
overtook us and sank the vessel. I chanced to be tossed in the water
near a great fragment of the mast, and clung to this until a passing
vessel found me. Of all aboard, I alone survived. Forty fathoms deep
lies the Emerald of the Sea, never more to be seen but by the dumb
creatures of the waters."

At these tidings the brave sailor's heart became like ice; nevertheless,
he cried:--

"Alas, good friend, I know that what you say is true, yet shall I not
despair; for, come what will, I must save my father!"

Hearing this, the fisherman's wife, a quiet, good body who had had
little to say, whispered that it would be well first to consult the
Witch of the Sands.

"The Witch of the Sands? Who is she and where can I find her?" cried the
sailor.

"The Witch of the Sands dwells a hundred leagues from here," replied the
fisherman's wife. "All the mysteries of the waters are in her keeping
and she has an answer for them all. You must go to her and ask her to
help you."

So the sailor thanked the good fisherman and his wife, and set out to
walk the hundred leagues to the house of the Witch of the Sands. His
path lay along a desolate and lonely shore, on whose rocky beaches the
wooden bones of old wrecks lay rotting, half buried in stones and weed.
Just as the third day's sun was sinking in the shining waters, the
sailor arrived at the Witch's dwelling.

The Witch made her home in a deserted old ship, which a storm of long
ago had cast far up the sands. As for the Witch herself, she was a woman
so old that the sailor thought she surely must have been living when the
moon and the stars were made. A fringe of sea-shells circled the crown
of her high hat, and round her wrists were bracelets of pearly
periwinkles.

Just as the sailor approached the Witch's door, a young fur seal, who
had been basking in a little pool left along the beach by the tide,
hastened out of his puddle, and running swiftly toward him on his
flappers, nuzzled his hand with his sleek, wet head, just like a young
dog.

"Down, Neptune, down!" cried the witch shrilly.

"Good evening, madam," said the sailor in his politest manner.

"You are the third person who has come here to ask me the question you
are going to ask," screamed the Witch of the Sands, whose magic powers
had revealed to her the reason of the sailor's coming. "I know you! You
are the youngest son. Your two brothers have been here to ask me the way
under the sea, and I told them; but bless me, they have n't come back
yet. Just like young men to forget an old woman's warning. I've a good
mind not to tell you the way to the under-waters; indeed, I would n't if
you were n't a sailor and a child of the sea. Yes, I can show you the
road to under the sea; but you must not ask me about the emerald,
because I don't know where it is myself. It was in the Land of the Dawn,
and that's the last I heard of it! When you do get to the under-waters,
don't forget that. You'll have to hurry back like the wind, for the year
which the King gave your father is almost gone. Don't ask me questions!
I know you are going to ask one, because I'm not a man; and I know what
you are going to ask, because I'm a witch."

And the strange old lady laughed and, putting her hands on her waist,
swayed so violently from side to side that the sea-shells on her hat
rattled and clicked. Then, after a pause to gather breath, she
continued: "Before you can go down into the waters, I shall have to give
you an enchanted ring. Mind you bring it back, for there are only three
of them in the whole wide world, and your brothers have the other two.
Goodness me, but I don't know why I let them take my magic rings. Now
that I come to think of it, I don't know as I shall let you take my
ring. However, it has been on my mind for some time to tell the King of
the City under the Sea that he's been telling the tide to come
altogether too near my ship. You can take the ring if you will promise
to deliver my message. Promise!"

There was a pause, and the sailor, who had listened to the Witch's every
word, solemnly promised to carry her message to the King under the Sea.
He was just about to ask a question or two, when the Witch of the Sands,
drawing another long, long breath, cried out again:--

"Don't ask questions! I've told you once and I've told you twice, and
I'll tell you as many times as there are drops of water in the sea! The
path to the City under the Sea begins a hundred leagues to the north; in
the high cliffs there, when the tide is low, you'll find the mouth of a
great cave; walk down this cave, and down and down and down, till you
feel water rising round your feet. Then put on my ring and walk boldly
ahead. In a little while you will see the city shining in the waters.
Once there, seek out the King and tell him of your quest. But on no
account" (and here the Witch solemnly turned round three times) "eat or
drink anything offered to you while you are in the under-waters. If you
do, you will forget everything of your past life, your father, your
quest, and the Emerald of the Sea. Let one drop pass your lips, and you
will spend the rest of your life under the waves. Here is the enchanted
ring. Put it in your pocket."

With these words, the Witch took from a little leather purse a simple
golden ring and handed it to the youngest son, who put the ring in his
pocket, thanked the Witch, and set off for the cavern, which led to the
City under the Sea. You may be sure it did not take him very long to
find it. After feeling carefully in his pocket to see if the ring was
still safe, the sailor plunged on into the winding cave. In a short
time, the roar of the breakers on the beach, which had been loud at the
mouth of the cavern, began to fade and grow faint, and the tunnel grew
dark and cold. Feeling for the wall of the passage with one hand, the
youngest son advanced into the blackness. Creatures of the sea, with
round shining eyes, stared at him from shallow pools, and now and then
his hand, running along the wall, would touch and shake from its place a
starfish or great snail.

Down and down and down went the sailor. Presently he heard the lapping
of wavelets in the darkness, and a few minutes after, he felt himself
advancing into deepening water. Stopping for an instant, he put on the
golden ring. Then, walking on again, he felt the water rise from his
ankles to his waist, and from his waist to his throat. One step more,
and the water closed over his head.

Once under the waves, the sailor hesitated, uncertain as to which way to
turn. Little by little, however, his eyes grew accustomed to the touch
of the water, and he saw, lying on the bottom a few feet ahead of him, a
small ball glowing with a pale phosphorescent light. Stooping to touch
this strange object, the sailor discovered it to be a small round
sea-plant which had anchored itself to a stone, and presently he
discovered that this light was but one of thousands which together
formed a long straight line across the level floor of the sea. Rightly
imagining these lights to be signs of a sea-world road, the sailor
advanced along them. A slow walk of ten long leagues brought him to the
gate of the City under the Sea.

There was very little light there, save for that which came through the
waters from the world above, and this was but a faint, pale green glow,
which lay, more like a shadow than a light on the roofs and tower-tops
of the submerged town.

The sailor walked unchallenged through the gate, and found himself in
the great street of the city. Along the broad avenue grew giant
sea-plants with brown leaves, set out in rows like trees; and through
the foliage which moved heavily in the currents, little fish darted like
birds. Many people walked slowly to and fro--strange people of the sea,
all dressed alike in tight-fitting garments of shining, fish-like
scales.

The sailor looked into their faces and saw that a broad golden ring
encircled the pupils of their eyes. Suddenly two men of the sea,
distinguished from the others by swords of red stone, moved through the
water, and seizing the sailor in their webbed hands, hurried him before
the King of the Under-Waters.

On a coral throne, in a great hall roofed with a high circular dome, sat
the King. The flowing waters within were bright, and a queer, pale green
light pierced through the hall from a kind of fountain of light in the
centre of the floor under the dome. Approaching this shining fountain,
the sailor discovered it to be a mass of glowing sea-creatures, living
flowers of the deep, which, even as he looked, stirred their mysterious
petals.

"Welcome, Wearer of the Enchanted Ring," said the King, staring hard at
the sailor with his large golden eyes. "You come at a fortunate time.
This very evening we celebrate the wedding of the second of my three
daughters with the mortal wearer of the second ring. Stand you upon the
steps of the throne, for they are coming at once. Let the trumpets
sound!"

At this command, two youths of the sea lifted huge conch-shells to their
mouths and sounded them.

Great doors instantly opened wide, and a gorgeous procession entered.
First, appeared a dozen pages; then, in walked the Sea King's second
daughter, hand in hand with a merry young man, in whom the sailor
recognized his second oldest brother.

Presently the conch-shells sounded again.

"The Prince and the Princess!" cried a voice.

The King leaned over from his throne and whispered in the sailor's
ear:--

"My eldest daughter and her husband. They were married just a year ago.
The Prince is a youth of the world above, and wears the first of the
enchanted rings."

Now entered the eldest Princess of the Sea, walking by the side of her
husband. And in the husband the young sailor beheld the elder of his two
brothers. And though the young sailor stretched out his arms to them,
neither of his brothers remembered him, for while faint and hungry, they
had forgotten the warning of the Witch of the Sands and had eaten of the
bread of the under-world. Thus had the memory of the world above, the
lost emerald, and their father's plight faded away.

The conches sounded a third time.

"Come to the wedding banquet," cried the King. "You shall sit beside my
youngest daughter."

And now the sailor lad, willy nilly, was hurried into the banquet hall,
and seated at the royal table beside the King's youngest daughter. And
she was quite the most beautiful of all the three. Noticing that the
youngest son touched no food, she said to him:--

"Why do you refuse to taste of the wedding banquet?"

"Princess," replied the sailor, "I have come to the Under-Waters to seek
the Emerald of the Sea; for if I return to my own country without it, my
father's life will be forfeited. Would you have me forget?"

"But you will never find the Emerald of the Sea!" cried the Princess.

"Never find the Emerald of the Sea! What do you mean?" said the sailor
anxiously.

"The Emerald of the Sea has disappeared," continued the little Princess,
fixing the sailor with her golden eyes. "Years ago it was stolen from my
father's treasury by a wicked Prince of the Under-Waters. My father
pursued him and overthrew him, but in the struggle the emerald was lost,
and rising to the surface, drifted to the shores of the Land of the
Dawn. There it remained till the Prince of the Unknown Isles purchased
it and took it away in his black ship. This ship, overcome by a storm,
sank; but where it lies we know not, though we have searched far and
wide through the waters. Whosoever finds it shall be master of the land
under the sea, for the emerald is master of us all. My father will not
lift a finger to help you find it; indeed, if he knows that you are in
search of it, he will force you to eat of the bread of the under-waters.
Say nothing, therefore, of your quest."

At these words, the brave sailor's heart sank very low. Mindful of the
Witch's warning, he dared touch no morsel of food, yet he knew that
hunger would soon bring weakness in its train. Either he must find the
emerald at once, or he must abandon all hope of finding it. He could not
live long if he touched no food, and if but one morsel touched his lips
he would forget the upper world.

Far away, the poor merchant, whom the King had now cast in prison,
watched the days pass one by one, and the last year approach its end.
Every morning he would ask for tidings of his sailor son, and ask in
vain.

Now, when the wedding banquet was over, and the ball which followed was
at its height, the eldest of the princesses called her sister, the
bride, aside and said to her:--

"We must rid ourselves at once of this newcomer. Do you not see that he
is the younger brother of our husbands? I beheld him stretch out his
arms to them as they passed. Who can tell but that he may lead them away
from us? Let us tell our servants to lie in wait for him and deliver us
from such a danger."

So said the eldest sister, of the golden eyes. Alas, I fear that the
people of the under-waters are sometimes quite as shocking as those of
the world above.

Later that evening, just as the poor sailor was standing by one of the
great doors, a dozen or so stout rogues in the service of the eldest
sister fell upon him, bound him with cords, and dragged him through the
water to the royal stables.

Now the people of the under-waters, having no horses,--for sea horses
are but tiny creatures,--had tamed great dolphins to carry them about. A
hundred of these monsters, each with a bronze ring in his nose, were
ranged along the sides of the stables, and on the fiercest and angriest
of them all, the Princess's servants tied the sailor. How the great
fish, fastened to a bar by a chain and his nose-ring, pulled, rolled,
swerved aside, and thrashed his tail! But all his twistings were of no
avail, for the poor sailor lad was soon fastened to his back with a rope
of seaweed. Then the creature was released from his chain, given a blow
on the side with a whip of shark-skin, and turned into the wilds of the
under-waters.

For half an hour, the fish, frightened at his burden, fled at lightning
speed over the roofs of the city, and sped on into the lonely plain.
Then, ceasing his mad flight, he tried again to shake himself free of
the sailor. He turned, he leaped, he dived, but all in vain, for the
sailor was securely fastened to his back. Terrified anew, with a swift
motion of his great fins, he shot violently to one side and rushed on
and on into the dark. All that long night he fled. Toward the morning of
the next day, however, the sailor managed to work one arm free, and draw
the cutlass from his waist. With this he made short work of his bonds
and rolled off the fish's back. The great animal, delivered of the
weight which had lain upon it, rose on the tip of its tail and shot
madly toward the surface, and the sailor tumbled through the waters to
the bottom.

Weak and hungry, the poor young seaman gazed about in the half-gloom,
and found himself on the lower slopes of a sunken mountain rising from
the ocean floor. In no direction could he find a sign of the City under
the Sea. Hoping, however, to see better from the mountain's top, he
decided to climb it. Strange plants and shells lay in the crevices of
the weedy rocks, schools of bright fish fled past him like living
arrows, and huge crabs scuttled away as he appeared. Suddenly, lying on
her side in a little ravine of the mountain, he saw a ship--the black
ship of the Emerald of the Sea! Weary and weak though he was, it took
the sailor but a moment to clamber aboard, and hurry past the broken
masts into the captain's cabin. A steady, green radiance shone in one
corner of the weedy room, and hastening toward it, the sailor found, at
last, the Emerald of the Sea. The box which had enclosed it had rotted
away and fallen apart.

"Victory!" cried the sailor, "victory! The emerald is mine at last, and
I shall save my father."

He took the great jewel from the broken box and rested it in the cup of
his two hands. How it glowed on the pale flesh! Then, thrusting it into
a pocket and holding onto it with one hand, he hurried out again to the
mountainside.

In the world above, it was high noon, and the level rays of the sun beat
deep into the green waters. So bright had the slope become, that the
sailor lad felt sure that he could not be far from the surface of the
waves. Moreover, if the mountain-top rose above the waters, it would
form an island in the upper world. And so, indeed, it was. Climbing on
toward the top of the mountain, the sailor first scaled a steep cliff,
and at the top of this he found a gentle slope of sand. The sun's rays
now illumined the water so brightly that the air seemed only a little
distance away. Presently a beach-crab ran nimbly away from beneath the
sailor's feet. The water grew very much warmer. The shore was at hand! A
few steps more, and the youngest son emerged on the beach of a beautiful
isle.

Half-blinded by the sun, he walked toward the dry land. There he found
some delicious fruits growing, and a rippling brook of crystal water. He
ate and drank, and his strength returned.

Himself again, the sailor took the Emerald of the Sea in his hands, and
cried,--

"By the power of the Emerald of the Sea, I summon here the two elder
princesses of the under-waters, and my two brothers, their husbands!"

There was a sound of far thunder under the clear blue sky, and a moment
later, four heads rose out of the waters, and shaking the salt spray
from their eyes, the princesses and the brothers walked through the
shallows to where the sailor was standing. Now, the princesses were very
much frightened when they beheld the sailor holding the all-powerful
emerald, and falling on their knees before him, begged him to forgive
their misdeeds, and not to take away their loved ones. Tears fell from
their golden eyes, and mingled with the drops of the salt ocean still
coursing down their black scales. As for the brothers, they would have
hurled themselves upon the sailor, had not the magic force of the
emerald prevented their approach.

"Be merciful and forgive," said the younger of the sisters. "After all,
had we not caused you to be spirited away, you never would have found
the emerald."

"Yes, that is true," said the sailor. "My brothers shall decide for
themselves. Break, then, the spell which binds them to the under-waters,
restore to them their memory of the past, and if then they choose to
remain, I shall not try to lead them away. Reverse the spell!"

"That is easily done," said the elder sister. "Let them but touch the
food or drink of the upper world and their memory will return."

And in less time than it takes to tell it, the sisters offered the
enchanted brothers water from the rivulet. When they had drunk of it,
both the brothers became pale as death, their eyes opened wide, and they
stared as strangely as men suddenly waked from sleep. Then, seeing their
younger brother, they ran to him and threw their arms about him, and
asked a thousand questions about their father and the quest of the
emerald.

The golden-eyed brides watched them with sad faces, and finally broke
into quiet tears. Imagine their joy, when their husbands returned to
them and bade them be of good cheer.

Thus was true love found to be mightier than the mightiest spell.

Now, when the princesses of the sea had dried their tears, the sailor
and his brothers took counsel as to how the Emerald of the Sea might be
brought to the King in time to save their father's life. You may judge
of the sailor's horror when he discovered that because of a bad error in
the calendars and clocks of Sixes and Sevens (a city he had visited in
his search for the emerald), the life of his father had been forfeited
to the King three days before!

But now we must return to the poor merchant himself.

All the third year the poor man had lain in a small cell in the royal
dungeons, waiting anxiously, oh, so anxiously, to hear the quick step of
the sailor son on the winding stairs just outside his prison door. But
the year came to an end, as you know, without his return. For the third
and last time, the castle guards led the poor man before the King. Now
the King had never forgiven the merchant for the loss of the jewel; his
chagrin, indeed, had increased with the years, and he was very glad that
he could at last take his revenge.

"Have you found the Emerald of the Sea?" said the King, harshly. He
stood erect on the steps of his judgment-seat, arms folded, eyes fixed
in a fierce, black frown.

"No," said the merchant quietly.

"Then you shall seek for it yourself," cried the King. And he gave
orders that the merchant be tied hand and foot, and tossed into a little
boat without food or drink, and then sent adrift to die helplessly in
the lonely seas. And so this awful sentence was carried out.

Bound hand and foot, scarce able to roll from side to side, the merchant
lay motionless in his little craft and stared up at the blue sky.
Presently a merciful sleep overcame him, and while he slept, a wind
arose which swept the little boat along with it.

Meanwhile, on the beautiful island, the sailor and his companions,
stunned at their discovery, began preparations to return to the
under-waters. Just as the twilight fell, all walked together to the
margin of the darkening sea, and advanced into the waves.

Suddenly, the sailor, whose eyes were the keenest, saw a little boat
rapidly drifting ashore. Now caught in a current of the shallow beach,
it drifted sideways; now propelled by the rising tide, it floated on,
bow pointed to the shore. The sailor hurried toward it and seized it.
Suddenly he uttered a ringing cry! The old merchant lay on the floor of
the boat. He still lived, for they could see him gently breathing.
Lifting him up tenderly, the three sons carried him to the shore,
unloosed his bonds, and brought him back to life.

Now when the merchant was himself again, the sailor, through the power
of the emerald, caused the waves to carry a great ship to the island,
and on this ship the three sons, the two princesses, and the old
merchant returned to the merchant's country. All landed secretly,
however, for they knew that the angry King would seize them if he knew
of their return. And so it came to pass that, one night, shortly after
the homecoming, word was brought to the sailor that the King had heard
of the merchant's escape and was sending guards to arrest the merchant
and his companions.

It was almost midnight when the sailor lad received the warning. Taking
the emerald with him, he advanced to a window by the ocean, and cried
out over the moonlit waters,--

"Waters of the Sea, rise and overwhelm the palace of the King!"

Now the King's palace stood apart by itself on a tongue of land running
far out into the tide, and soon the rising waters were flowing over the
marble floors and pouring in through the windows. One by one, the lights
in the thousand rooms, touched by the waves, hissed, sputtered, and
expired. The servants of the palace, one and all, ran away pell-mell,
and left the dark castle to its fate. Little by little the advancing
water crept from the walls to the balconies, from the balconies to the
towers, and from the foot of the towers to their very tops. Finally, all
the moon could see as it shone upon the flood was the weather-vane of
the highest turret of all. You should have seen the little waves ripple
and break about it! And finally, even the weather-vane disappeared under
the black waves.

Locked in his secret treasure-room, opening the jewel coffers one after
the other, the King remained quite ignorant of the disaster. For some
time no sound reached him in his hidden retreat, because the door of the
treasure-room was very thick and strong. Suddenly he heard behind him
the sound of falling water, and turning toward the door, beheld streams
of water gushing through the passages between the door and its frame.
Horror-struck, he watched the door burst from its locks and hinges; a
roaring cascade of cold sea-water came pouring in the room, and a moment
later the whole castle crumbled and fell to pieces.

Now, when the King had met his deserts, the people of the country, who
greatly respected the merchant, offered him the crown; but he refused it
and conferred it on his two elder sons. Thus it came to pass that the
country had two kings. Each brother in turn reigned for six months of
every year, and spent the other six under the sea with the golden-eyed
people of the waters.

As for the sailor lad, he sailed the sea for many years, and finally
married a pretty niece of the Witch of the Sands. Then, like all
sailors, he went to the country to live. His house is built of gray
stone, ivy climbs over it, and apple orchards lie beneath its windows.

And the all lived happily ever after.﻿Did you ever hear of the golden apples that grew in the garden of the
Hesperides? Ah, those were such apples as would bring a great price, by
the bushel, if any of them could be found growing in the orchards of
nowadays! But there is not, I suppose, a graft of that wonderful fruit
on a single tree in the wide world. Not so much as a seed of those
apples exists any longer.

And, even in the old, old, half-forgotten times, before the garden of
the Hesperides was overrun with weeds, a great many people doubted
whether there could be real trees that bore apples of solid gold upon
their branches. All had heard of them, but nobody remembered to have
seen any. Children, nevertheless, used to listen, open-mouthed, to
stories of the golden apple tree, and resolved to discover it, when they
should be big enough. Adventurous young men, who desired to do a braver
thing than any of their fellows, set out in quest of this fruit. Many of
them returned no more; none of them brought back the apples. No wonder
that they found it impossible to gather them! It is said that there was
a dragon beneath the tree, with a hundred terrible heads, fifty of
which were always on the watch, while the other fifty slept.

In my opinion it was hardly worth running so much risk for the sake of a
solid golden apple. Had the apples been sweet, mellow, and juicy, indeed
that would be another matter. There might then have been some sense in
trying to get at them, in spite of the hundred-headed dragon.

But, as I have already told you, it was quite a common thing with young
persons, when tired of too much peace and rest, to go in search of the
garden of the Hesperides. And once the adventure was undertaken by a
hero who had enjoyed very little peace or rest since he came into the
world. At the time of which I am going to speak, he was wandering
through the pleasant land of Italy, with a mighty club in his hand, and
a bow and quiver slung across his shoulders. He was wrapt in the skin of
the biggest and fiercest lion that ever had been seen, and which he
himself had killed; and though, on the whole, he was kind, and generous,
and noble, there was a good deal of the lion's fierceness in his heart.
As he went on his way, he continually inquired whether that were the
right road to the famous garden. But none of the country people knew
anything about the matter, and many looked as if they would have laughed
at the question, if the stranger had not carried so very big a club.

So he journeyed on and on, still making the same inquiry, until, at
last, he came to the brink of a river where some beautiful young women
sat twining wreaths of flowers.

"Can you tell me, pretty maidens," asked the stranger, "whether this is
the right way to the garden of the Hesperides?"

The young women had been having a fine time together, weaving the
flowers into wreaths, and crowning one another's heads. And there seemed
to be a kind of magic in the touch of their fingers, that made the
flowers more fresh and dewy, and of brighter hues, and sweeter
fragrance, while they played with them, than even when they had been
growing on their native stems. But, on hearing the stranger's question,
they dropped all their flowers on the grass, and gazed at him with
astonishment.

"The garden of the Hesperides!" cried one. "We thought mortals had been
weary of seeking it, after so many disappointments. And pray,
adventurous traveller, what do you want there?"

"A certain king, who is my cousin," replied he, "has ordered me to get
him three of the golden apples."

"Most of the young men who go in quest of these apples," observed
another of the damsels, "desire to obtain them for themselves, or to
present them to some fair maiden whom they love. Do you, then, love this
king, your cousin, so very much?"

"Perhaps not," replied the stranger, sighing. "He has often been severe
and cruel to me. But it is my destiny to obey him."

"And do you know," asked the damsel who had first spoken, "that a
terrible dragon, with a hundred heads, keeps watch under the golden
apple tree?"

"I know it well," answered the stranger, calmly. "But, from my cradle
upward, it has been my business, and almost my pastime, to deal with
serpents and dragons."

The young women looked at his massive club, and at the shaggy lion's
skin which he wore, and likewise at his heroic limbs and figure; and
they whispered to each other that the stranger appeared to be one who
might reasonably expect to perform deeds far beyond the might of other
men. But, then, the dragon with a hundred heads! What mortal, even if he
possessed a hundred lives, could hope to escape the fangs of such a
monster? So kind-hearted were the maidens that they could not bear to
see this brave and handsome traveller attempt what was so very
dangerous, and devote himself, most probably, to become a meal for the
dragon's hundred ravenous mouths.

"Go back," cried they all--"go back to your own home! Your mother,
beholding you safe and sound, will shed tears of joy; and what can she
do more, should you win ever so great a victory? No matter for the
golden apples! No matter for the king, your cruel cousin! We do not wish
the dragon with the hundred heads to eat you up!"

The stranger seemed to grow impatient at these remonstrances. He
carelessly lifted his mighty club, and let it fall upon a rock that lay
half buried in the earth, near by. With the force of that idle blow, the
great rock was shattered all to pieces. It cost the stranger no more
effort to achieve this feat of a giant's strength than for one of the
young maidens to touch her sister's rosy cheek with a flower.

"Do you not believe," said he, looking at the damsels with a smile,
"that such a blow would have crushed one of the dragon's hundred heads?"

Then he sat down on the grass, and told them the story of his life, or
as much of it as he could remember, from the day when he was first
cradled in a warrior's brazen shield. While he lay there, two immense
serpents came gliding over the floor, and opened their hideous jaws to
devour him; and he, a baby of a few months old, had griped one of the
fierce snakes in each of his little fists, and strangled them to death.
When he was but a stripling, he had killed a huge lion, almost as big as
the one whose vast and shaggy hide he now wore upon his shoulders. The
next thing that he had done was to fight a battle with an ugly sort of
monster, called a hydra, which had no less than nine heads, and
exceedingly sharp teeth in every one.

"But the dragon of the Hesperides, you know," observed one of the
damsels, "has a hundred heads!"

"Nevertheless," replied the stranger, "I would rather fight two such
dragons than a single hydra. For, as fast as I cut off a head, two
others grew in its place; and, besides, there was one of the heads that
could not possibly be killed, but kept biting as fiercely as ever, long
after it was cut off. So I was forced to bury it under a stone, where it
is doubtless alive to this very day. But the hydra's body, and its eight
other heads, will never do any further mischief."

The damsels, judging that the story was likely to last a good while, had
been preparing a repast of bread and grapes, that the stranger might
refresh himself in the intervals of his talk. They took pleasure in
helping him to this simple food; and, now and then, one of them would
put a sweet grape between her rosy lips, lest it should make him bashful
to eat alone.

The traveller proceeded to tell how he had chased a very swift stag for
a twelvemonth together, without ever stopping to take breath, and had at
last caught it by the antlers, and carried it home alive. And he had
fought with a very odd race of people, half horses and half men, and had
put them all to death, from a sense of duty, in order that their ugly
figures might never be seen any more. Besides all this, he took to
himself great credit for having cleaned out a stable.

"Do you call that a wonderful exploit?" asked one of the young maidens,
with a smile. "Any clown in the country has done as much!"

"Had it been an ordinary stable," replied the stranger, "I should not
have mentioned it. But this was so gigantic a task that it would have
taken me all my life to perform it, if I had not luckily thought of
turning the channel of a river through the stable door. That did the
business in a very short time!"

Seeing how earnestly his fair auditors listened, he next told them how
he had shot some monstrous birds, and had caught a wild bull alive and
let him go again, and had tamed a number of very wild horses, and had
conquered Hippolyta, the warlike queen of the Amazons. He mentioned,
likewise, that he had taken off Hippolyta's enchanted girdle and had
given it to the daughter of his cousin, the king.

"Was it the girdle of Venus," inquired the prettiest of the damsels,
"which makes women beautiful?"

"No," answered the stranger. "It had formerly been the sword belt of
Mars; and it can only make the wearer valiant and courageous."

"An old sword belt!" cried the damsel, tossing her head. "Then I should
not care about having it!"

"You are right," said the stranger.

Going on with his wonderful narrative, he informed the maidens that as
strange an adventure as ever happened was when he fought with Geryon,
the six-legged man. This was a very odd and frightful sort of figure, as
you may well believe. Any person, looking at his tracks in the sand or
snow, would suppose that three sociable companions had been walking
along together. On hearing his footsteps at a little distance, it was no
more than reasonable to judge that several people must be coming. But it
was only the strange man Geryon clattering onward, with his six legs!

Six legs, and one gigantic body! Certainly, he must have been a very
queer monster to look at; and, my stars, what a waste of shoe leather!

When the stranger had finished the story of his adventures, he looked
around at the attentive faces of the maidens.

"Perhaps you may have heard of me before," said he, modestly. "My name
is Hercules!"

"We had already guessed it," replied the maidens; "for your wonderful
deeds are known all over the world. We do not think it strange, any
longer, that you should set out in quest of the golden apples of the
Hesperides. Come, sisters, let us crown the hero with flowers!"

Then they flung beautiful wreaths over his stately head and mighty
shoulders, so that the lion's skin was almost entirely covered with
roses. They took possession of his ponderous club, and so entwined it
about with the brightest, softest, and most fragrant blossoms that not a
finger's breadth of its oaken substance could be seen. It looked all
like a huge bunch of flowers. Lastly, they joined hands, and danced
around him, chanting words which became poetry of their own accord, and
grew into a choral song, in honour of the illustrious Hercules.

And Hercules was rejoiced, as any other hero would have been, to know
that these fair young girls had heard of the valiant deeds which it had
cost him so much toil and danger to achieve. But still he was not
satisfied. He could not think that what he had already done was worthy
of so much honour, while there remained any bold or difficult adventure
to be undertaken.

"Dear maidens," said he, when they paused to take breath, "now that you
know my name, will you not tell me how I am to reach the garden of the
Hesperides?"

"Ah! must you go to soon?" they exclaimed. "You--that have performed so
many wonders, and spent such a toilsome life--cannot you content
yourself to repose a little while on the margin of this peaceful river?"

Hercules shook his head.

"I must depart now," said he.

"We will then give you the best directions we can," replied the damsels.
"You must go to the seashore, and find out the Old One, and compel him
to inform you where the golden apples are to be found."

"The Old One!" repeated Hercules, laughing at this odd name. "And, pray,
who may the Old One be?"

"Why, the Old Man of the Sea, to be sure!" answered one of the damsels.
"He has fifty daughters, whom some people call very beautiful; but we do
not think it proper to be acquainted with them, because they have
sea-green hair, and taper away like fishes. You must talk with this Old
Man of the Sea. He is a seafaring person, and knows all about the garden
of the Hesperides, for it is situated in an island which he is often in
the habit of visiting."

Hercules then asked whereabouts the Old One was most likely to be met
with. When the damsels had informed him, he thanked them for all their
kindness,--for the bread and grapes with which they had fed him, the
lovely flowers with which they had crowned him, and the songs and
dances wherewith they had done him honour--and he thanked them, most of
all, for telling him the right way--and immediately set forth upon his
journey.

But, before he was out of hearing, one of the maidens called after him.

"Keep fast hold of the Old One, when you catch him!" cried she, smiling,
and lifting her finger to make the caution more impressive. "Do not be
astonished at anything that may happen. Only hold him fast, and he will
tell you what you wish to know."

Hercules again thanked her, and pursued his way, while the maidens
resumed their pleasant labour of making flower wreaths. They talked
about the hero long after he was gone.

"We will crown him with the loveliest of our garlands," said they, "when
he returns hither with the three golden apples, after slaying the dragon
with a hundred heads."

Meanwhile, Hercules travelled constantly onward, over hill and dale, and
through the solitary woods. Sometimes he swung his club aloft, and
splintered a mighty oak with a downright blow. His mind was so full of
the giants and monsters with whom it was the business of his life to
fight, that perhaps he mistook the great tree for a giant or a monster.
And so eager was Hercules to achieve what he had undertaken, that he
almost regretted to have spent so much time with the damsels, wasting
idle breath upon the story of his adventures. But thus it always is with
persons who are destined to perform great things. What they have already
done seems less than nothing. What they have taken in hand to do seems
worth toil, danger, and life itself. Persons who happened to be passing
through the forest must have been affrighted to see him smite the trees
with his great club. With but a single blow, the trunk was riven as by
the stroke of lightning and the broad boughs came rustling and crashing
down.

Hastening forward, without ever pausing or looking behind, he by and by
heard the sea roaring at a distance. At this sound, he increased his
speed, and soon came to a beach, where the great surf waves tumbled
themselves upon the hard sand, in a long line of snowy foam. At one end
of the beach, however, there was a pleasant spot, where some green
shrubbery clambered up a cliff, making its rocky face look soft and
beautiful. A carpet of verdant grass, largely intermixed with
sweet-smelling clover, covered the narrow space between the bottom of
the cliff and the sea. And what should Hercules espy there but an old
man, fast asleep!

But was it really and truly an old man? Certainly, at first sight, it
looked very like one; but, on closer inspection, it rather seemed to be
some kind of a creature that lived in the sea. For on his legs and arms
there were scales, such as fishes have; he was web-footed and
web-fingered, after the fashion of a duck; and his long beard, being of
a greenish tinge, had more the appearance of a tuft of seaweed than of
an ordinary beard. Have you never seen a stick of timber, that has been
long tossed about by the waves, and has got all overgrown with
barnacles, and, at last drifting ashore, seems to have been thrown up
from the very deepest bottom of the sea. Well, the old man would have
put you in mind of just such a wave-tossed spar! But Hercules, the
instant he set eyes on this strange figure, was convinced that it could
be no other than the Old One, who was to direct him on his way.

Yes, it was the selfsame Old Man of the Sea whom the hospitable maidens
had talked to him about. Thanking his stars for the lucky accident of
finding the old fellow asleep, Hercules stole on tiptoe toward him, and
caught him by the arm and leg.

"Tell me," cried he, before the Old One was well awake, "which is the
way to the garden of the Hesperides?"

As you may easily imagine, the Old Man of the Sea awoke in a fright. But
his astonishment could hardly have been greater than was that of
Hercules, the next moment. For, all of a sudden, the Old One seemed to
disappear out of his grasp, and he found himself holding a stag by the
fore and hind leg! But still he kept fast hold. Then the stag
disappeared, and in its stead there was a sea bird, fluttering and
screaming, while Hercules clutched it by the wing and claw! But the bird
could not get away. Immediately afterward, there was an ugly
three-headed dog, which growled and barked at Hercules, and snapped
fiercely at the hands by which he held him! But Hercules would not let
him go. In another minute, instead of the three-headed dog, what should
appear but Geryon, the six-legged man monster, kicking at Hercules with
five of his legs, in order to get the remaining one at liberty! But
Hercules held on. By and by, no Geryon was there, but a huge snake, like
one of those which Hercules had strangled in his babyhood, only a
hundred times as big; and it twisted and twined about the hero's neck
and body, and threw its tail high into the air, and opened its deadly
jaws as if to devour him outright; so that it was really a very terrible
spectacle! But Hercules was no whit disheartened, and squeezed the great
snake so tightly that he soon began to hiss with pain.

You must understand that the Old Man of the Sea, though he generally
looked so much like the wave-beaten figurehead of a vessel, had the
power of assuming any shape he pleased. When he found himself so roughly
seized by Hercules, he had been in hopes of putting him into such
surprise and terror, by these magical transformations, that the hero
would be glad to let him go. If Hercules had relaxed his grasp, the Old
One would certainly have plunged down to the very bottom of the sea,
whence he would not soon have given himself the trouble of coming up, in
order to answer any impertinent questions. Ninety-nine people out of a
hundred, I suppose, would have been frightened out of their wits by the
very first of his ugly shapes, and would have taken to their heels at
once. For one of the hardest things in this world is to see the
difference between real dangers and imaginary ones.

But, as Hercules held on so stubbornly, and only squeezed the Old One so
much the tighter at every change of shape, and really put him to no
small torture, he finally thought it best to reappear in his own figure.
So there he was again, a fishy, scaly, web-footed sort of personage,
with something like a tuft of seaweed at his chin.

"Pray, what do you want with me?" cried the Old One, as soon as he could
take breath; for it is quite a tiresome affair to go through so many
false shapes. "Why do you squeeze me so hard? Let me go this moment, or
I shall begin to consider you an extremely uncivil person!"

"My name is Hercules!" roared the mighty stranger. "And you will never
get out of my clutch until you tell me the nearest way to the garden of
the Hesperides!"

When the old fellow heard who it was that had caught him, he saw with
half an eye that it would be necessary to tell him everything that he
wanted to know. The Old One was an inhabitant of the sea, you must
recollect, and roamed about everywhere, like other seafaring people. Of
course, he had often heard of the fame of Hercules, and of the wonderful
things that he was constantly performing in various parts of the earth,
and how determined he always was to accomplish whatever he undertook. He
therefore made no more attempts to escape, but told the hero how to find
the garden of the Hesperides, and likewise warned him of many
difficulties which must be overcome before he could arrive thither.

"You must go on, thus and thus," said the Old Man of the Sea, after
taking the points of the compass, "till you come in sight of a very tall
giant, who holds the sky on his shoulders. And the giant, if he happens
to be in the humour, will tell you exactly where the garden of the
Hesperides lies."

"And if the giant happens not to be in the humour," remarked Hercules,
balancing his club on the tip of his finger, "perhaps I shall find means
to persuade him!"

Thanking the Old Man of the Sea, and begging his pardon for having
squeezed him so roughly, the hero resumed his journey. He met with a
great many strange adventures, which would be well worth your hearing,
if I had leisure to narrate them as minutely as they deserve.

It was in this journey, if I mistake not, that he encountered a
prodigious giant, who was so wonderfully contrived by nature that, every
time he touched the earth, he became ten times as strong as ever he had
been before. His name was Antæus. You may see, plainly enough, that it
was a very difficult business to fight with such a fellow; for, as often
as he got a knock-down blow, up he started again, stronger, fiercer, and
abler to use his weapons than if his enemy had let him alone. Thus, the
harder Hercules pounded the giant with his club, the further he seemed
from winning the victory. I have sometimes argued with such people, but
never fought with one. The only way in which Hercules found it possible
to finish the battle was by lifting Antæus off his feet into the air,
and squeezing, and squeezing, and squeezing him until, finally, the
strength was quite squeezed out of his enormous body.

When this affair was finished, Hercules continued his travels, and went
to the land of Egypt, where he was taken prisoner, and would have been
put to death if he had not slain the king of the country and made his
escape. Passing through the deserts of Africa, and going as fast as he
could, he arrived at last on the shore of the great ocean. And here,
unless he could walk on the crests of the billows, it seemed as if his
journey must needs be at an end.

Nothing was before him, save the foaming, dashing, measureless ocean.
But, suddenly, as he looked toward the horizon, he saw something, a
great way off, which he had not seen the moment before. It gleamed very
brightly, almost as you may have beheld the round, golden disc of the
sun, when it rises or sets over the edge of the world. It evidently drew
nearer; for, at every instant, this wonderful object became larger and
more lustrous. At length, it had come so nigh that Hercules discovered
it to be an immense cup or bowl, made either of gold or burnished brass.
How it had got afloat upon the sea is more than I can tell you. There it
was, at all events, rolling on the tumultuous billows, which tossed it
up and down, and heaved their foamy tops against its sides, but without
ever throwing their spray over the brim.

"I have seen many giants, in my time," thought Hercules, "but never one
that would need to drink his wine out of a cup like this!"

And, true enough, what a cup it must have been! It was as large--as
large--but, in short, I am afraid to say how immeasurably large it was.
To speak within bounds, it was ten times larger than a great mill wheel;
and, all of metal as it was, it floated over the heaving surges more
lightly than an acorn cup adown the brook. The waves tumbled it onward,
until it grazed against the shore, within a short distance of the spot
where Hercules was standing.

As soon as this happened, he knew what was to be done; for he had not
gone through so many remarkable adventures without learning pretty well
how to conduct himself, whenever anything came to pass a little out of
the common rule. It was just as clear as daylight that this marvellous
cup had been set adrift by some unseen power, and guided hitherward, in
order to carry Hercules across the sea, on his way to the garden of the
Hesperides. Accordingly, without a moment's delay, he clambered over the
brim, and slid down on the inside, where, spreading out his lion's skin,
he proceeded to take a little repose. He had scarcely rested, until now,
since he bade farewell to the damsels on the margin of the river. The
waves dashed, with a pleasant and ringing sound, against the
circumference of the hollow cup; it rocked lightly to and fro, and the
motion was so soothing that it speedily rocked Hercules into an
agreeable slumber.

His nap had probably lasted a good while, when the cup chanced to graze
against a rock, and, in consequence, immediately resounded and
reverberated through its golden or brazen substance, a hundred times as
loudly as ever you heard a church bell. The noise awoke Hercules, who
instantly started up and gazed around him, wondering whereabouts he was.
He was not long in discovering that the cup had floated across a great
part of the sea, and was approaching the shore of what seemed to be an
island. And, on that island, what do you think he saw?

No; you will never guess it, not if you were to try fifty thousand
times! It positively appears to me that this was the most marvellous
spectacle that had ever been seen by Hercules in the whole course of his
wonderful travels and adventures. It was a greater marvel than the hydra
with nine heads, which kept growing twice as fast as they were cut off;
greater than the six-legged man monster; greater than Antæus; greater
than anything that was ever beheld by anybody, before or since the days
of Hercules, or than anything that remains to be beheld by travellers in
all time to come. It was a giant!

But such an intolerably big giant! A giant as tall as a mountain; so
vast a giant that the clouds rested about his midst, like a girdle, and
hung like a hoary beard from his chin, and flitted before his huge eyes,
so that he could neither see Hercules nor the golden cup in which he was
voyaging. And, most wonderful of all, the giant held up his great hands
and appeared to support the sky, which, so far as Hercules could discern
through the clouds, was resting upon his head! This does really seem
almost too much to believe.

Meanwhile, the bright cup continued to float onward, and finally touched
the strand. Just then a breeze wafted away the clouds from before the
giant's visage, and Hercules beheld it, with all its enormous features;
eyes each of them as big as yonder lake, a nose a mile long, and a mouth
of the same width. It was a countenance terrible from its enormity of
size, but disconsolate and weary, even as you may see the faces of many
people, nowadays, who are compelled to sustain burdens above their
strength. What the sky was to the giant, such are the cares of earth to
those who let themselves be weighed down by them. And whenever men
undertake what is beyond the just measure of their abilities, they
encounter precisely such a doom as had befallen this poor giant.

Poor fellow! He had evidently stood there a long while. An ancient
forest had been growing and decaying around his feet; and oak trees, of
six or seven centuries old, had sprung from the acorn, and forced
themselves between his toes.

The giant now looked down from the far height of his great eyes, and,
perceiving Hercules, roared out, in a voice that resembled thunder,
proceeding out of the cloud that had just flitted away from his face.

"Who are you, down at my feet there? And whence do you come in that
little cup?"

"I am Hercules!" thundered back the hero, in a voice pretty nearly or
quite as loud as the giant's own. "And I am seeking for the garden of
the Hesperides!"

"Ho! ho! ho!" roared the giant, in a fit of immense laughter. "That is a
wise adventure, truly!"

"And why not?" cried Hercules, getting a little angry at the giant's
mirth. "Do you think I am afraid of the dragon with a hundred heads!"

Just at this time, while they were talking together, some black clouds
gathered about the giant's middle, and burst into a tremendous storm of
thunder and lightning, causing such a pother that Hercules found it
impossible to distinguish a word. Only the giant's immeasurable legs
were to be seen, standing up into the obscurity of the tempest; and, now
and then, a momentary glimpse of his whole figure, mantled in a volume
of mist. He seemed to be speaking, most of the time; but his big, deep,
rough voice chimed in with the reverberations of the thunder claps, and
rolled away over the hills, like them. Thus, by talking out of season,
the foolish giant expended an incalculable quantity of breath to no
purpose; for the thunder spoke quite as intelligibly as he.

At last, the storm swept over as suddenly as it had come. And there
again was the clear sky, and the weary giant holding it up, and the
pleasant sunshine beaming over his vast height, and illuminating it
against the background of the sullen thunder clouds. So far above the
shower had been his head, that not a hair of it was moistened by the
rain-drops!

When the giant could see Hercules still standing on the seashore, he
roared out to him anew.

"I am Atlas, the mightiest giant in the world! And I hold the sky upon
my head!"

"So I see," answered Hercules. "But, can you show me the way to the
garden of the Hesperides?"

"What do you want there?" asked the giant.

"I want three of the golden apples," shouted Hercules, "for my cousin,
the king."

"There is nobody but myself," quoth the giant, "that can go to the
garden of the Hesperides, and gather the golden apples. If it were not
for this little business of holding up the sky, I would make half a
dozen steps across the sea and get them for you."

"You are very kind," replied Hercules. "And cannot you rest the sky upon
a mountain?"

"None of them are quite high enough," said Atlas, shaking his head. "But
if you were to take your stand on the summit of that nearest one, your
head would be pretty nearly on a level with mine. You seem to be a
fellow of some strength. What if you should take my burden on your
shoulders, while I do your errand for you?"

Hercules, as you must be careful to remember, was a remarkably strong
man; and though it certainly requires a great deal of muscular power to
uphold the sky, yet, if any mortal could be supposed capable of such an
exploit, he was the one. Nevertheless, it seemed so difficult an
undertaking that, for the first time in his life, he hesitated.

"Is the sky very heavy?" he inquired.

"Why, not particularly so, at first," answered the giant, shrugging his
shoulders. "But it gets to be a little burdensome after a thousand
years!"

"And how long a time," asked the hero, "will it take you to get the
golden apples?"

"Oh, that will be done in a few moments," cried Atlas. "I shall take ten
or fifteen miles at a stride, and be at the garden and back again before
your shoulders begin to ache."

"Well, then," answered Hercules, "I will climb the mountain behind you
there and relieve you of your burden."

The truth is, Hercules had a kind heart of his own, and considered that
he should be doing the giant a favour by allowing him this opportunity
for a ramble. And, besides, he thought that it would be still more for
his own glory if he could boast of upholding the sky, than merely to do
so ordinary a thing as to conquer a dragon with a hundred heads.
Accordingly, without more words, the sky was shifted from the shoulders
of Atlas and placed upon those of Hercules.

When this was safely accomplished, the first thing that the giant did
was to stretch himself; and you may imagine what a prodigious spectacle
he was then. Next, lie slowly lifted one of his feet out of the forest
that had grown up around it; then, the other. Then, all at once, he
began to caper, and leap, and dance for joy at his freedom; flinging
himself nobody knows how high into the air, and floundering down again
with a shock that made the earth tremble. Then he laughed--Ho! ho!
ho!--with a thunderous roar that was echoed from the mountains, far and
near, as if they and the giant had been so many rejoicing brothers. When
his joy had a little subsided, he stepped into the sea; ten miles at the
first stride, which brought him midleg deep; and ten miles at the
second, when the water came just above his knees; and ten miles more at
the third, by which he was immersed nearly to his waist. This was the
greatest depth of the sea.

Hercules watched the giant as he still went onward; for it was really a
wonderful sight, this immense human form, more than thirty miles off,
half hidden in the ocean, but with his upper half as tall, and misty,
and blue as a distant mountain. At last the gigantic shape faded
entirely out of view. And now Hercules began to consider what he should
do in case Atlas should be drowned in the sea, or if he were to be stung
to death by the dragon with the hundred heads, which guarded the golden
apples of the Hesperides. If any such misfortune were to happen, how
could he ever get rid of the sky? And, by the by, its weight began
already to be a little irksome to his head and shoulders.

"I really pity the poor giant," thought Hercules. "If it wearies me so
much in ten minutes, how must it have wearied him in a thousand years!"

O my sweet little people, you have no idea what a weight there was in
that same blue sky, which looks so soft and aërial above our heads! And
there, too, was the bluster of the wind, and the chill and watery
clouds, and the blazing sun, all taking their turns to make Hercules
uncomfortable! He began to be afraid that the giant would never come
back. He gazed wistfully at the world beneath him, and acknowledged to
himself that it was a far happier kind of life to be a shepherd at the
foot of a mountain than to stand on its dizzy summit and bear up the
firmament with his might and main. For, of course, as you will easily
understand, Hercules had an immense responsibility on his mind, as well
as a weight on his head and shoulders. Why, if he did not stand
perfectly still, and keep the sky immovable, the sun would perhaps be
put ajar! Or, after nightfall, a great many of the stars might be
loosened from their places, and shower down, like fiery rain, upon the
people's heads! And how ashamed would the hero be if, owing to his
unsteadiness beneath its weight, the sky should crack and show a great
fissure quite across it!

I know not how long it was before, to his unspeakable joy, he beheld the
huge shape of the giant, like a cloud, on the far-off edge of the sea.
At his nearer approach, Atlas held up his hand, in which Hercules could
perceive three magnificent golden apples, as big as pumpkins, all
hanging from one branch.

"I am glad to see you again," shouted Hercules, when the giant was
within hearing. "So you have got the golden apples?"

"Certainly, certainly," answered Atlas; "and very fair apples they are.
I took the finest that grew on the tree, I assure you. Ah! it is a
beautiful spot, that garden of Hesperides. Yes; and the dragon with a
hundred heads is a sight worth any man's seeing. After all, you had
better have gone for the apples yourself."

"No matter," replied Hercules. "You have had a pleasant ramble, and have
done the business as well as I could. I heartily thank you for your
trouble. And now, as I have a long way to go, and am rather in
haste--and as the king, my cousin, is anxious to receive the golden
apples--will you be kind enough to take the sky off my shoulders again?"

"Why, as to that," said the giant, chucking the golden apples into the
air twenty miles high, or thereabouts and catching them as they came
down--"as to that, my good friend, I consider you a little unreasonable.
Cannot I carry the golden apples to the king, your cousin, much quicker
than you could? As His Majesty is in such a hurry to get them, I promise
you to take my longest strides. And, besides, I have no fancy for
burdening myself with the sky, just now."

Here Hercules grew impatient, and gave a great shrug of his shoulders.
It being now twilight, you might have seen two or three stars tumble out
of their places. Everybody on earth looked upward in affright, thinking
that the sky might be going to fall next.

"Oh, that will never do!" cried Giant Atlas, with a great roar of
laughter. "I have not let fall so many stars within the last five
centuries. By the time you have stood there as long as I did, you will
begin to learn patience!"

"What!" shouted Hercules, very wrathfully, "do you intend to make me
bear this burden forever?"

"We will see about that, one of these days," answered the giant. "At all
events, you ought not to complain if you have to bear it the next
hundred years, or perhaps the next thousand. I bore it a good while
longer, in spite of the backache. Well, then, after a thousand years, if
I happen to feel in the mood, we may possibly shift about again. You are
certainly a very strong man, and can never have a better opportunity to
prove it. Posterity will talk of you, I warrant it!"

"Pish! a fig for its talk!" cried Hercules, with another hitch of his
shoulders. "Just take the sky upon your head one instant, will you? I
want to make a cushion of my lion's skin, for the weight to rest upon.
It really chafes me, and will cause unnecessary inconvenience in so many
centuries as I am to stand here."

"That's no more than fair, and I'll do it!" quoth the giant; for he had
no unkind feeling toward Hercules, and was merely acting with a too
selfish consideration of his own ease. "For just five minutes, then,
I'll take back the sky. Only for five minutes, recollect! I have no idea
of spending another thousand years as I spent the last. Variety is the
spice of life, say I."

Ah, the thick-witted old rogue of a giant! He threw down the golden
apples, and received back the sky from the head and shoulders of
Hercules, upon his own, where it rightly belonged. And Hercules picked
up the three golden apples, that were as big or bigger than pumpkins and
straightway set out on his journey homeward, without paying the
slightest heed to the thundering tones of the giant, who bellowed after
him to come back. Another forest sprang up around his feet, and grew
ancient there; and again might be seen oak trees, of six or seven
centuries old, that had waxed thus aged betwixt his enormous toes.

And there stands the giant to this day; or, at any rate, there stands a
mountain as tall as he, and which bears his name; and when the thunder
rumbles about its summit, we may imagine it to be the voice of Giant
Atlas, bellowing after Hercules!


