When the great city of Troy was taken , all the chiefs who had fought
against it set sail for their homes . But there was wrath in heaven
against them , for indeed they had borne themselves haughtily and cruelly
in the day of their victory . Therefore they did not all find a safe and
happy return . For one was shipwrecked , and another was shamefully slain
by his false wife in his palace , and others found all things at home
troubled and changed , and were driven to seek new dwellings elsewhere . 
And some , whose wives and friends and people had been still true to them
through those ten long years of absence , were driven far and wide about
the world before they saw their native land again . And of all , the wise
Ulysses was he who wandered farthest and suffered most . 

He was well-nigh the last to sail , for he had tarried many days to do
pleasure to Agamemnon , lord of all the Greeks . Twelve ships he had with
him--twelve he had brought to Troy--and in each there were some fifty
men , being scarce half of those that had sailed in them in the old days , 
so many valiant heroes slept the last sleep by Simoïs and Scamander , and
in the plain and on the seashore , slain in battle or by the shafts of
Apollo . 

First they sailed northwest to the Thracian coast , where the Ciconians
dwelt , who had helped the men of Troy . Their city they took , and in it
much plunder , slaves and oxen , and jars of fragrant wine , and might
have escaped unhurt , but that they stayed to hold revel on the shore . 
For the Ciconians gathered their neighbours , being men of the same
blood , and did battle with the invaders , and drove them to their ship . 
And when Ulysses numbered his men , he found that he had lost six out of
each ship . 

Scarce had he set out again when the wind began to blow fiercely; so , 
seeing a smooth sandy beach , they drave the ships ashore and dragged
them out of reach of the waves , and waited till the storm should abate . 
And the third morning being fair , they sailed again , and journeyed
prosperously till they came to the very end of the great Peloponnesian
land , where Cape Malea looks out upon the southern sea . But contrary
currents baffled them , so that they could not round it , and the north
wind blew so strongly that they must fain drive before it . And on the
tenth day they came to the land where the lotus grows--a wondrous fruit , 
of which whosoever eats cares not to see country or wife or children
again . Now the Lotus eaters , for so they call the people of the land , 
were a kindly folk , and gave of the fruit to some of the sailors , not
meaning them any harm , but thinking it to be the best that they had to
give . These , when they had eaten , said that they would not sail any more
over the sea; which , when the wise Ulysses heard , he bade their comrades
bind them and carry them , sadly complaining , to the ships . 

Then , the wind having abated , they took to their oars , and rowed for
many days till they came to the country where the Cyclopes dwell . Now , a
mile or so from the shore there was an island , very fair and fertile , 
but no man dwells there or tills the soil , and in the island a harbour
where a ship may be safe from all winds , and at the head of the harbour
a stream falling from the rock , and whispering alders all about it . Into
this the ships passed safely , and were hauled up on the beach , and the
crews slept by them , waiting for the morning . And the next day they
hunted the wild goats , of which there was great store on the island , and
feasted right merrily on what they caught , with draughts of red wine
which they had carried off from the town of the Ciconians . 

But on the morrow , Ulysses , for he was ever fond of adventure , and would
know of every land to which he came what manner of men they were that
dwelt there , took one of his twelve ships and bade row to the land . 
There was a great hill sloping to the shore , and there rose up here and
there a smoke from the caves where the Cyclopes dwelt apart , holding no
converse with each other , for they were a rude and savage folk , but
ruled each his own household , not caring for others . Now very close to
the shore was one of these caves , very huge and deep , with laurels round
about the mouth , and in front a fold with walls built of rough stone , 
and shaded by tall oaks and pines . So Ulysses chose out of the crew the
twelve bravest , and bade the rest guard the ship , and went to see what
manner of dwelling this was , and who abode there . He had his sword by
his side , and on his shoulder a mighty skin of wine , sweet smelling and
strong , with which he might win the heart of some fierce savage , should
he chance to meet with such , as indeed his prudent heart forecasted that
he might . 

So they entered the cave , and judged that it was the dwelling of some
rich and skilful shepherd . For within there were pens for the young of
the sheep and of the goats , divided all according to their age , and
there were baskets full of cheeses , and full milkpails ranged along the
wall . But the Cyclops himself was away in the pastures . Then the
companions of Ulysses besought him that he would depart , taking with
him , if he would , a store of cheeses and sundry of the lambs and of the
kids . But he would not , for he wished to see , after his wont , what
manner of host this strange shepherd might be . And truly he saw it to
his cost ! 

It was evening when the Cyclops came home , a mighty giant , twenty feet
in height , or more . On his shoulder he bore a vast bundle of pine logs
for his fire , and threw them down outside the cave with a great crash , 
and drove the flocks within , and closed the entrance with a huge rock , 
which twenty wagons and more could not bear . Then he milked the ewes and
all the she goats , and half of the milk he curdled for cheese , and half
he set ready for himself , when he should sup . Next he kindled a fire
with the pine logs , and the flame lighted up all the cave , showing him
Ulysses and his comrades . 

"Who are ye ? " cried Polyphemus , for that was the giant's name . "Are ye
traders , or , haply , pirates ? "

For in those days it was not counted shame to be called a pirate . 

Ulysses shuddered at the dreadful voice and shape , but bore him bravely , 
and answered , "We are no pirates , mighty sir , but Greeks , sailing back
from Troy , and subjects of the great King Agamemnon , whose fame is
spread from one end of heaven to the other . And we are come to beg
hospitality of thee in the name of Zeus , who rewards or punishes hosts
and guests according as they be faithful the one to the other , or no . "

"Nay , " said the giant , "it is but idle talk to tell me of Zeus and the
other gods . We Cyclopes take no account of gods , holding ourselves to
be much better and stronger than they . But come , tell me where have you
left your ship ? "

But Ulysses saw his thought when he asked about the ship , how he was
minded to break it , and take from them all hope of flight . Therefore he
answered him craftily:

"Ship have we none , for that which was ours King Poseidon brake , driving
it on a jutting rock on this coast , and we whom thou seest are all that
are escaped from the waves . "

Polyphemus answered nothing , but without more ado caught up two of the
men , as a man might catch up the whelps of a dog , and dashed them on the
ground , and tore them limb from limb , and devoured them , with huge
draughts of milk between , leaving not a morsel , not even the very bones . 
But the others , when they saw the dreadful deed , could only weep and
pray to Zeus for help . And when the giant had ended his foul meal , he
lay down among his sheep and slept . 

Then Ulysses questioned much in his heart whether he should slay the
monster as he slept , for he doubted not that his good sword would pierce
to the giant's heart , mighty as he was . But , being very wise , he
remembered that , should he slay him , he and his comrades would yet
perish miserably . For who should move away the great rock that lay
against the door of the cave ? So they waited till the morning . And the
monster woke , and milked his flocks , and afterward , seizing two men , 
devoured them for his meal . Then he went to the pastures , but put the
great rock on the mouth of the cave , just as a man puts down the lid
upon his quiver . 

All that day the wise Ulysses was thinking what he might best do to save
himself and his companions , and the end of his thinking was this: There
was a mighty pole in the cave , green wood of an olive tree , big as a
ship's mast , which Polyphemus purposed to use , when the smoke should
have dried it , as a walking staff . Of this he cut off a fathom's length , 
and his comrades sharpened it and hardened it in the fire , and then hid
it away . At evening the giant came back , and drove his sheep into the
cave , nor left the rams outside , as he had been wont to do before , but
shut them in . And having duly done his shepherd's work , he made his
cruel feast as before . Then Ulysses came forward with the wine skin in
his hand , and said:

"Drink , Cyclops , now that thou hast feasted . Drink , and see what
precious things we had in our ship . But no one hereafter will come to
thee with such like , if thou dealest with strangers as cruelly as thou
hast dealt with us . "

Then the Cyclops drank , and was mightily pleased , and said , "Give me
again to drink , and tell me thy name , stranger , and I will give thee a
gift such as a host should give . In good truth this is a rare liquor . 
We , too , have vines , but they bear not wine like this , which indeed must
be such as the gods drink in heaven . "

Then Ulysses gave him the cup again , and he drank . Thrice he gave it to
him , and thrice he drank , not knowing what it was , and how it would work
within his brain . 

Then Ulysses spake to him . "Thou didst ask my name , Cyclops . Lo ! my name
is No Man . And now that thou knowest my name , thou shouldst give me thy
gift . "

And he said , "My gift shall be that I will eat thee last of all thy
company . "

And as he spake he fell back in a drunken sleep . Then Ulysses bade his
comrades be of good courage , for the time was come when they should be
delivered . And they thrust the stake of olive wood into the fire till it
was ready , green as it was , to burst into flame , and they thrust it into
the monster's eye; for he had but one eye , and that in the midst of his
forehead , with the eyebrow below it . And Ulysses leant with all his
force upon the stake , and thrust it in with might and main . And the
burning wood hissed in the eye , just as the red-hot iron hisses in the
water when a man seeks to temper steel for a sword . 

Then the giant leapt up , and tore away the stake , and cried aloud , so
that all the Cyclopes who dwelt on the mountain side heard him and came
about his cave , asking him , "What aileth thee , Polyphemus , that thou
makest this uproar in the peaceful night , driving away sleep ? Is any one
robbing thee of thy sheep , or seeking to slay thee by craft or force ? "

And the giant answered , "No Man slays me by craft . "

"Nay , but , " they said , "if no man does thee wrong , we cannot help thee . 
The sickness which great Zeus may send , who can avoid ? Pray to our
father , Poseidon , for help . "

Then they departed; and Ulysses was glad at heart for the good success
of his device , when he said that he was No Man . 

But the Cyclops rolled away the great stone from the door of the cave , 
and sat in the midst stretching out his hands , to feel whether perchance
the men within the cave would seek to go out among the sheep . 

Long did Ulysses think how he and his comrades should best escape . At
last he lighted upon a good device , and much he thanked Zeus for that
this once the giant had driven the rams with the other sheep into the
cave . For , these being great and strong , he fastened his comrades under
the bellies of the beasts , tying them with osier twigs , of which the
giant made his bed . One ram he took , and fastened a man beneath it , and
two others he set , one on either side . So he did with the six , for but
six were left out of the twelve who had ventured with him from the ship . 
And there was one mighty ram , far larger than all the others , and to
this Ulysses clung , grasping the fleece tight with both his hands . So
they waited for the morning . And when the morning came , the rams rushed
forth to the pasture; but the giant sat in the door and felt the back of
each as it went by , nor thought to try what might be underneath . Last of
all went the great ram . And the Cyclops knew him as he passed and said:

"How is this , thou , who art the leader of the flock ? Thou art not wont
thus to lag behind . Thou hast always been the first to run to the
pastures and streams in the morning , and the first to come back to the
fold when evening fell; and now thou art last of all . Perhaps thou art
troubled about thy master's eye , which some wretch--No Man , they call
him--has destroyed , having first mastered me with wine . He has not
escaped , I ween . I would that thou couldst speak , and tell me where he
is lurking . Of a truth I would dash out his brains upon the ground , and
avenge me of this No Man . "

So speaking , he let him pass out of the cave . But when they were out of
reach of the giant , Ulysses loosed his hold of the ram , and then unbound
his comrades . And they hastened to their ship , not forgetting to drive
before them a good store of the Cyclops' fat sheep . Right glad were
those that had abode by the ship to see them . Nor did they lament for
those that had died , though they were fain to do so , for Ulysses
forbade , fearing lest the noise of their weeping should betray them to
the giant , where they were . Then they all climbed into the ship , and
sitting well in order on the benches , smote the sea with their oars , 
laying-to right lustily , that they might the sooner get away from the
accursed land . And when they had rowed a hundred yards or so , so that a
man's voice could yet be heard by one who stood upon the shore , Ulysses
stood up in the ship and shouted:

"He was no coward , O Cyclops , whose comrades thou didst so foully slay
in thy den . Justly art thou punished , monster , that devourest thy guests
in thy dwelling . May the gods make thee suffer yet worse things than
these ! "

Then the Cylops , in his wrath , broke off the top of a great hill , a
mighty rock , and hurled it where he had heard the voice . Right in front
of the ship's bow it fell , and a great wave rose as it sank , and washed
the ship back to the shore . But Ulysses seized a long pole with both
hands and pushed the ship from the land , and bade his comrades ply their
oars , nodding with his head , for he was too wise to speak , lest the
Cyclops should know where they were . Then they rowed with all their
might and main . 

And when they had gotten twice as far as before , Ulysses made as if he
would speak again; but his comrades sought to hinder him , saying , "Nay , 
my lord , anger not the giant any more . Surely we thought before we were
lost , when he threw the great rock , and washed our ship back to the
shore . And if he hear thee now , he may crush our ship and us , for the
man throws a mighty bolt , and throws it far . "

But Ulysses would not be persuaded , but stood up and said , "Hear , 
Cyclops ! If any man ask who blinded thee , say that it was the warrior
Ulysses , son of Laertes , dwelling in Ithaca . "

And the Cyclops answered with a groan , "Of a truth , the old oracles are
fulfilled , for long ago there came to this land one Telemus , a prophet , 
and dwelt among us even to old age . This man foretold me that one
Ulysses would rob me of my sight . But I looked for a great man and a
strong , who should subdue me by force , and now a weakling has done the
deed , having cheated me with wine . But come thou hither , Ulysses , and I
will be a host indeed to thee . Or , at least , may Poseidon give thee such
a voyage to thy home as I would wish thee to have . For know that
Poseidon is my sire . May be that he may heal me of my grievous wound . "

And Ulysses said , "Would to God , I could send thee down to the abode of
the dead , where thou wouldst be past all healing , even from Poseidon's
self . "

Then Cyclops lifted up his hands to Poseidon and prayed:

"Hear me , Poseidon , if I am indeed thy son and thou my father . May this
Ulysses never reach his home ! or , if the Fates have ordered that he
should reach it , may he come alone , all his comrades lost , and come to
find sore trouble in his house ! "

And as he ended he hurled another mighty rock , which almost lighted on
the rudder's end , yet missed it as if by a hair's breadth . So Ulysses
and his comrades escaped , and came to the island of the wild goats , 
where they found their comrades , who indeed had waited long for them , in
sore fear lest they had perished . Then Ulysses divided among his company
all the sheep which they had taken from the Cyclops . And all , with one
consent , gave him for his share the great ram which had carried him out
of the cave , and he sacrificed it to Zeus . And all that day they feasted
right merrily on the flesh of sheep and on sweet wine , and when the
night was come , they lay down upon the shore and slept . 


