The young Tamlane had lived among mortals for only nine short
years ere he was carried away by the Queen of the Fairies, away
to live in Fairyland.

His father had been a knight of great renown, his mother a lady
of high degree, and sorry indeed were they to lose their son.

And this is how it happened.

One day, soon after Tamlane's ninth birthday, his uncle came to
him and said, 'Tamlane, now that ye are nine years old, ye shall,
an ye like it, ride with me to the hunt.'

And Tamlane jumped for joy, and clapped his hands for glee. Then
he mounted his horse and rode away with his uncle to hunt and
hawk.

Over the moors they rode, and the wind it blew cold from the
north. Over the moors they rode, and the cold north wind blew
upon the young Tamlane until he grew cold and stiff.

Then the reins they fell from his hands and down from his horse
slipped Tamlane, and laid himself down to rest, so weary, so cold
was he. But no sooner had he lain down on the bare earth than he
closed his eyes and fell fast asleep. And no sooner had he fallen
fast asleep than the Queen of the Fairies came and carried
Tamlane off to Fairyland.

For long years Tamlane dwelt among the little green folk, yet
ofttimes he would come back to visit the land of his birth.

Now many were the hills and dells haunted by the fairy folk. Yet
neither hill nor dell pleased them more than the lone plain of
Carterhaugh, where the soft-flowing rivers of Ettrick and Yarrow
met and mingled.

Many a long day after fairies were banished from the plain of
Carterhaugh would the peasant folk come to gaze at the circles
which still marked the green grass of the lone moor. The circles
had been made, so they said, by the tiny feet of the fairies as
they danced round and round in a ring.

Well, in the days before the fairies were banished from the plain
of Carterhaugh, strange sights were to be seen there by the light
of the moon.

Little folk, dressed all in green, would flit across the moor.
They would form tiny rings and dance on their tiny toes until the
moonlight failed.

Little horsemen dressed in green would go riding by, the bells on
the fairy bridles playing magic music the while. Sounds too,
unknown to mortals, would tremble on the still night air.

Full of mischief too were these little elfin folk, and wise
mortals feared to tread where fairy feet were tripping.

Wise mortals would warn the merry children and the winsome
maidens lest they should venture too near the favourite haunts of
fairydom.

To Carterhaugh came, as I have told you, many of the fairy folk;
but more often than any other came a little elfin knight, and he
was the young Tamlane, who had been carried away to Fairyland
when he was only nine years old.

Beyond all other of the little green folk was the elf knight
feared. And little was that to be wondered at, for well was it
known that over many a fair-haired child, over many a beauteous
maiden, he had used his magic power. Nor would he let them go
until they promised to come back another moonlit eve, and as a
pledge of their promise he would seize from the children a toy,
from the maidens a ring, or it might be their mantle of green.

Now about two miles from the plain of Carterhaugh stood a castle,
and in the castle there lived a fair maiden named Janet.

One day her father sent for his daughter and said, 'Janet, ye may
leave the castle grounds, an ye please, but never may ye cross
the plain of Carterhaugh. For there ye may be found by young
Tamlane, and he it is who ofttimes casts a spell o'er bonny
maidens.'

Now Janet was a wilful daughter. She answered her father never a
word, but when she had left his presence she laughed aloud, she
tossed her head.

To her ladies she said, 'Go to Carterhaugh will I an I list, and
come from Carterhaugh will I an I please, and never will I ask
leave of any one.'

Then when the moonbeams peeped in at her lattice window, the lady
Janet tucked up her green skirt, so that she might run, and she
coiled her beautiful yellow hair as a crown above her brow. And
she was off and away to the lone plain of Carterhaugh.

The moonlight stole across the moor, and Janet laughed aloud in
her glee. She ran across to the well, and there, standing alone,
riderless, stood the steed of the little elfin knight.

Janet put out her hand to the rose-tree that grew by the well and
plucked a dark red rose. Sweet was its scent and Janet put out
her hand and plucked another rose, but ere she had pulled a
third, close beside her stood a little wee man. He reached no
higher than the knee of the lady Janet.

'Ye have come to Carterhaugh, Janet,' he cried, 'and yet ye have
not asked my leave. Ye have plucked my red roses and broken a
branch of my bonny rose-tree. Have ye no fear of me, Janet?'

The lady Janet tossed her head, though over her she felt creeping
slow the spell of the little elfin knight. She tossed her head
and she cried, 'Nay, I have no fear of you, ye little wee man.
Nor will I ever ask leave of you as I come to and fro across the
plain of Carterhaugh. Ye shall know that the moor belongs to me,
me!' and Janet stamped her foot. 'My father made it all my own.'

But the young Tamlane took the white hand of the lady Janet in
his own, and so gentle were his words, so kind his ways, that
soon the maiden had no wish to leave the little wee man. Hand in
hand they wandered through the red rose-bushes that grew by the
side of the well. And in the light of the moon the elf knight
wove his spell and made the lady Janet his own.

Back to the castle sped Janet when the moonlight failed, but all
her smiles were gone. Lone and sad was she, all with longing for
her little elfin knight.

Little food would Janet eat in these days, little heed would she
take of the gowns she wore. Her yellow hair hung down uncombed,
unbraided around her sad, pale face.

Janet had been used to join in the games her four-and-twenty
maidens played. She had run the quickest, tossed the ball the
highest, nor had any been more full of glee than she.

Now the maidens might play as they listed, little did the lady
Janet care.

When evening fell, her four-and-twenty ladies would play their
games of chess. Many a game had Janet won in bygone days.

Now the ladies might win or lose as they pleased, little did the
lady Janet care. Her heart was away on the plain of Carterhaugh
with her little wee elfin knight, and soon she herself would be
there.

Once more the moonbeams peeped in at her lattice window, and
Janet smiled, put on her fairest gown, and combed her yellow
locks. She was off and away to Carterhaugh.