And Janet put out her hand and plucked a red red rose, but ere
she had plucked another, close beside her stood the young
Tamlane.

'Why do ye pluck my roses?' asked the little elf man. But Janet
had not come to talk about the roses, and she paid no heed to his
question.

'Tell me, Tamlane,' said the lady Janet, 'tell me, have ye always
been a little elfin man? Have ye never, in days gone by, been to
the holy chapel, and have ye never had made over you the sign of
the Holy Cross?'

'Indeed now, Janet, the truth will I tell!' cried the young
Tamlane.

Then the lady Janet listened, and the lady Janet wept as the
little wee knight told her how he had been carried away by the
Queen of the Fairies.

But yet a stranger tale he told to the maiden.

'Ere I was carried off to Fairyland, Janet,' said young Tamlane,
'we played as boy and girl in the old castle grounds, and well we
loved each other as we played together in those merry merry days
of long ago. Ye do not forget, Janet?'

Then back into the lady Janet's mind stole the memory of her
childhood's merry days, and of the little lad who had shared her
toys and played her games. Together they had made the walls of
the old castle ring with their laughter.

No, the lady Janet had not forgotten, and she knew that now, as
in the days of long ago, she loved the young Tamlane.

'Tell me,' she said, 'tell me how ye do spend your day in
Fairyland?'

'Blithe and gay is the life we lead,' cried the little wee
knight. 'There is no sickness, no pain of any kind in Fairyland,
Janet.

'In earth or air I dwell as pleases me the best. I can leave this
little body of mine an it pleases me, and come back to it an I
will. I am small, as you see me now, but when I will, I grow so
small that a nut-shell is my home, a rosebud my bed. But I can
grow big as well, Janet, so big that I needs must make my home in
some lofty hall.

'Hither and thither we flit, bathe in the streams, frolic in the
wind, play with the sunbeams.

'Never would I wish to leave Fairyland, Janet, were it not that
at the end of each seven years an evil spirit comes to carry one
of us off to his dark abode. And I, so fair and fat am I, I fear
that I shall be chosen by the Evil one.

'But weep not, Janet; an you wish to bring me back to the land of
mortals, I will e'en show you how that may be done. Little time
is there to lose, for to-night is Hallowe'en, and this same
night must the deed be done.

'On Hallowe'en, at the midnight hour, the fairy court will ride a
mile beyond Carterhaugh to the cross at Milestone. Wait for me
there, Janet, and ye will win your own true knight.'

'But many a knight will ride amid the fairy train. How shall I
know you, my little wee man?' cried Janet.

'Neither among the first nor among the second company shall ye
seek for me,' said young Tamlane. 'Only when ye see the third
draw nigh give heed, Janet, for among them ye will find me.

'Not on the black horse, nor yet on the brown horse, shall I
ride. Let them pass, and keep ye quiet. But as the milk-white
steed goes by, seize ye the bridle, Janet, and pull me down, and
keep your arms ever around me. For on the milk-white steed I
ride.

'On my right hand ye will see a glove, my left will be
uncovered. Now, by these signs, ye will know your own true
knight.

'Hold me fast, Janet, hold me fast, as you pull me down from my
milk-white steed. For while your arms are around me, the fairy
folk will change me into fearful shapes.

'Into an adder, and into a snake they will change me. Yet, an ye
love me, Janet, fear ye nought, but hold me fast.

'They will change me into a lion, and into a bear. Yet, as I love
you, Janet, fear ye nought, but hold me fast.

'A toad, an eel I shall become, yet do not let me slide from your
arms, Janet, but hold me fast.

'But, an the fairy folk change me into a blazing fagot, or a bar
of hot iron, then throw me far from you, Janet, into the cold,
clear well, throw me with all your speed.

'There will I change into your own true knight, Janet, and ye
shall throw over me your mantle of green velvet.'

Dark was the night and full of gloom as the lady Janet hastened
to the cross at Milestone, but her heart was glad and full of
light. She would see her own true knight in mortal form before
the dawn of Hallowday.

It was between the hours of twelve and one o'clock when Janet
stood alone at the spot where the fairy train would pass.

Fearsome it was there alone in the gloom, but the lady Janet was
heedful of nought. She had but to wait, to listen. Yet not a
sound did she hear, save only the wind as it whistled through the
long grass.

Not a sound save the wind did she hear? Ah yes, now strange
noises were blown to her eager ears. The bells on fairy bridles
tinkled, the music of the tiny fairy band piped each moment more
clear.

Janet looked, and by the light of Will o' Wisp she could just
catch sight of their little oaten pipes. Shrill were the notes
they blew on these, but softer were the sounds they blew through
tiny hemlock pipes. Then deeper came the tones of the bog-reeds
and large hemlock, and Janet, looking, saw the little green folk
draw nigh.

How merry the music was, how glad and good! Never was known a
fairy yet who sang or played of aught but joy and mirth.

The first company of the little folk passed Janet as she stood
patient, watchful by the cross; the second passed, and then there
came the third.

'The black steed! Let it go,' said Janet to herself.

'The brown steed! It matters not to me, she whispered.

'The milk-white steed!' Ah, Janet had seized the bridle of the
milk-white steed and pulled the little rider off into her strong
young arms.

A cry of little elfs, of angry little elfs, rang out on the chill
night air.

Then as he lay in Janet's arms the angry little imps changed
their stolen elfin knight into an adder, a snake, a bear, a lion,
a toad, an eel, and still, through all these changes, the lady
Janet held him fast.

'A blazing fagot! Let him change into a blazing fagot!' cried the
angry little folk. 'Then this foolish mortal will let our
favorite knight alone.'

And as young Tamlane changed into a blazing fagot the little folk
thought they had got their will. For now the lady Janet threw him
from her, far into the clear, cold well.

But the little angry imps were soon shrieking in dismay. No
sooner was the fagot in the well than the little elfin knight was
restored to his own true mortal form.

Then over the tall, strong knight Janet threw her green mantle,
and the power of the fairies over the young Tamlane was for ever
gone. Their spell was broken.

Now, the Queen of the Fairies had hidden herself in a bush of
broom to see what would happen. And when she saw her favourite
knight change into his own true mortal shape, she was very cross,
very cross indeed. The little fairy band was ordered to march
home in silence, their pipes thrust into their tiny green
girdles, and there were no more revels in the fairy court for
many and many a long day to come.
