One morning Thor the Thunderer awoke with a yawn , and stretching out his
knotted arm , felt for his precious hammer , which he kept always under
his pillow of clouds . But he started up with a roar of rage , so that all
the palace trembled . The hammer was gone ! 

Now this was a very serious matter , for Thor was the protector of
Asgard , and Miölnir , the magic hammer which the dwarf had made , was his
mighty weapon , of which the enemies of the AEsir stood so much in dread
that they dared not venture near . But if they should learn that Miölnir
was gone , who could tell what danger might not threaten the palaces of
heaven ? 

Thor darted his flashing eye into every corner of Cloud Land in search
of the hammer . He called his fair wife , Sif of the golden hair , to aid
in the search , and his two lovely daughters , Thrude and Lora . They
hunted and they hunted; they turned Thrudheim upside down , and set the
clouds to rolling wonderfully , as they peeped and pried behind and
around and under each billowy mass . But Miölnir was not to be found . 
Certainly , someone had stolen it . 

Thor ' s yellow beard quivered with rage , and his hair bristled on end
like the golden rays of a star , while all his household trembled . 

 " It is Loki again ! " he cried .  " I am sure Loki is at the bottom of this
mischief ! " For since the time when Thor had captured Loki for the dwarf
Brock and had given him over to have his bragging lips sewed up , Loki
had looked at him with evil eyes; and Thor knew that the red rascal
hated him most of all the gods . 

But this time Thor was mistaken . It was not Loki who had stolen the
hammer--he was too great a coward for that . And though he meant , before
the end , to be revenged upon Thor , he was waiting until a safe chance
should come , when Thor himself might stumble into danger , and Loki need
only to help the evil by a malicious word or two; and this chance came
later , as you shall hear in another tale . 

Meanwhile Loki was on his best behaviour , trying to appear very kind and
obliging; so when Thor came rumbling and roaring up to him , demanding , 
 " What have you done with my hammer , you thief ? " Loki looked surprised , 
but did not lose his temper nor answer rudely . 

 " Have you indeed missed your hammer , brother Thor ? " he said , mumbling , 
for his mouth was still sore where Brock had sewed the stitches .  " That
is a pity; for if the giants hear of this , they will be coming to try
their might against Asgard . " 

 " Hush ! " muttered Thor , grasping him by the shoulder with his iron
fingers .  " That is what I fear . But look you , Loki: I suspect your hand
in the mischief . Come , confess . " 

Then Loki protested that he had nothing to do with so wicked a deed . 
 " But , " he added wheedlingly ,  " I think I can guess the thief; and because
I love you , Thor , I will help you to find him . " 

 " Humph ! " growled Thor .  " Much love you bear to me ! However , you are a
wise rascal , the nimblest wit of all the AEsir , and it is better to have
you on my side than on the other , when giants are in the game . Tell me , 
then: who has robbed the Thunder Lord of his bolt of power ? " 

Loki drew near and whispered in Thor ' s ear .  " Look , how the storms rage
and the winds howl in the world below ! Someone is wielding your thunder
hammer all unskilfully . Can you not guess the thief ? Who but Thrym , the
mighty giant who has ever been your enemy and your imitator , and whose
fingers have long itched to grasp the short handle of mighty Miölnir , 
that the world may name him Thunder Lord instead of you . But look ! What
a tempest ! The world will be shattered into fragments unless we soon get
the hammer back . " 

Then Thor roared with rage .  " I will seek this impudent Thrym ! " he cried . 
 " I will crush him into bits , and teach him to meddle with the weapon of
the AEsir ! " 

 " Softly , softly , " said Loki , smiling maliciously .  " He is a shrewd giant , 
and a mighty . Even you , great Thor , cannot go to him and pluck the
hammer from his hand as one would slip the rattle from a baby ' s pink
fist . Nay , you must use craft , Thor; and it is I who will teach you , if
you will be patient . " 

Thor was a brave , blunt fellow , and he hated the ways of Loki , his lies
and his deceit . He liked best the way of warriors--the thundering
charge , the flash of weapons , and the heavy blow; but without the hammer
he could not fight the giants hand to hand . Loki ' s advice seemed wise , 
and he decided to leave the matter to the Red One . 

Loki was now all eagerness , for he loved difficulties which would set
his wit in play and bring other folk into danger .  " Look , now , " he said . 
 " We must go to Freia and borrow her falcon dress . But you must ask; for
she loves me so little that she would scarce listen to me . " 

So first they made their way to Folkvang , the house of maidens , where
Freia dwelt , the loveliest of all in Asgard . She was fairer than fair , 
and sweeter than sweet , and the tears from her flower eyes made the dew
which blessed the earth flowers night and morning . Of her Thor borrowed
the magic dress of feathers in which Freia was wont to clothe herself
and flit like a great beautiful bird all about the world . She was
willing enough to lend it to Thor when he told her that by its aid he
hoped to win back the hammer which he had lost; for she well knew the
danger threatening herself and all the AEsir until Miölnir should be
found . 

 " Now will I fetch the hammer for you , " said Loki . So he put on the
falcon plumage , and , spreading his brown wings , flapped away up , up , 
over the world , down , down , across the great ocean which lies beyond all
things that men know . And he came to the dark country where there was no
sunshine nor spring , but it was always dreary winter; where mountains
were piled up like blocks of ice , and where great caverns yawned
hungrily in blackness . And this was Jotunheim , the land of the Frost
Giants . 

And lo ! when Loki came thereto he found Thrym the Giant King sitting
outside his palace cave , playing with his dogs and horses . The dogs were
as big as elephants , and the horses were as big as houses , but Thrym
himself was as huge as a mountain; and Loki trembled , but he tried to
seem brave . 

 " Good-day , Loki , " said Thrym , with the terrible voice of which he was so
proud , for he fancied it was as loud as Thor ' s .  " How fares it , 
feathered one , with your little brothers , the AEsir , in Asgard halls ? And
how dare you venture alone in this guise to Giant Land ? " 

 " It is an ill day in Asgard , " sighed Loki , keeping his eye warily upon
the giant ,  " and a stormy one in the world of men , I heard the winds
howling and the storms rushing on the earth as I passed by . Some mighty
one has stolen the hammer of our Thor . Is it you , Thrym , greatest of all
giants--greater than Thor himself ? " 

This the crafty one said to flatter Thrym , for Loki well knew the
weakness of those who love to be thought greater than they are . 

Then Thrym bridled and swelled with pride , and tried to put on the
majesty and awe of noble Thor; but he only succeeded in becoming an
ugly , puffy monster . 

 " Well , yes , " he admitted .  " I have the hammer that belonged to your
little Thor; and now how much of & lord is he ? " 

 " Alack ! " sighed Loki again ,  " weak enough he is without his magic weapon . 
But you , O Thrym--surely your mightiness needs no such aid . Give me the
hammer , that Asgard may no longer be shaken by Thor ' s grief for his
precious toy . " 

But Thrym was not so easily to be flattered into parting with his stolen
treasure . He grinned a dreadful grin , several yards in width , which his
teeth barred like jagged boulders across the entrance to a mountain
cavern , 

 " Miölnir the hammer is mine , " he said ,  " and I am Thunder Lord , mightiest
of the mighty . I have hidden it where Thor can never find it , twelve
leagues below the sea caves , where Queen Ran lives with her daughters , 
the white-capped Waves . But listen , Loki . Go tell the AEsir that I will
give back Thor ' s hammer . I will give it back upon one condition--that
they send Freia the beautiful to be my wife . " 

 " Freia the beautiful ! " Loki had to stifle a laugh . Fancy the AEsir giving
their fairest flower to such an ugly fellow as this ! But he only said
politely ,  " Ah , yes; you demand our Freia in exchange for the little
hammer ? It is a costly price , great Thrym . But I will be your friend in
Asgard . If I have my way , you shall soon see the fairest bride in all
the world knocking at your door . Farewell ! " 

So Loki whizzed back to Asgard on his falcon wings; and as he went he
chuckled to think of the evils which were likely to happen because of
his words with Thrym . First he gave the message to Thor--not sparing of
Thrym ' s insolence , to make Thor angry; and then he went to Freia with
the word for her--not sparing of Thrym ' s ugliness , to make her shudder . 
The spiteful fellow ! 

Now you can imagine the horror that was in Asgard as the AEsir listened
to Loki ' s words .  " My hammer ! " roared Thor .  " The villain confesses that
he has stolen my hammer , and boasts that he is Thunder Lord ! Gr-r-r ! " 

 " The ugly giant ! " wailed Freia .  " Must I be the bride of that hideous old
monster , and live in his gloomy mountain prison all my life ? " 

 " Yes; put on your bridal veil , sweet Freia , " said Loki maliciously ,  " and
come with me to Jotunheim . Hang your famous starry necklace about your
neck , and don your bravest robe; for in eight days there will be a
wedding , and Thor ' s hammer is to pay . " 

Then Freia fell to weeping .  " I cannot go ! I will not go ! " she cried .  " I
will not leave the home of gladness and Father Odin ' s table to dwell in
the land of horrors ! Thor ' s hammer is mighty , but mightier the love of
the kind AEsir for their little Freia ! Good Odin , dear brother Frey , 
speak for me ! You will not make me go ? " 

The Asir looked at her and thought how lonely and bare would Asgard be
without her loveliness; for she was fairer than fair , and sweeter than
sweet . 

 " She shall not go ! " shouted Frey , putting his arms about his sister ' s
neck . 

 " No , she shall not go ! " cried all the Asir with one voice . 

 " But my hammer , " insisted Thor .  " I must have Miölnir back again . " 

 " And my word to Thrym , " said Loki ,  " that must be made good . " 

 " You are too generous with your words , " said Odin sternly , for he knew
his brother well .  " Your word is not a gem of great price , for you have
made it cheap . " 

Then spoke Heimdal , the sleepless watchman who sits on guard at the
entrance to the rainbow bridge which leads to Asgard; and Heimdal was
the wisest of the AEsir , for he could see into the future , and knew how
things would come to pass . Through his golden teeth he spoke , for his
teeth were all of gold . 

 " I have a plan , " he said .  " Let us dress Thor himself like a bride in
Freia ' s robes , and send him to Jotunheim to talk with Thrym and to win
back his hammer . " 

But at this word Thor grew very angry .  " What ! dress me like a girl ! " he
roared .  " I should never hear the last of it ! The Asir will mock me , and
call me  ' maiden ' ! The giants , and even the puny dwarfs , will have a
lasting jest upon me ! I will not go ! I will fight ! I will die , if need
be ! But dressed as a woman I will not go ! " 

But Loki answered him with sharp words , for this was a scheme after his
own heart .  " What , Thor ! " he said .  " Would you lose your hammer and keep
Asgard in danger for so small a whim . Look , now: if you go not , Thrym
with his giants will come in a mighty army and drive us from Asgard;
then he will indeed make Freia his bride , and , moreover , he will have
you for his slave under the power of his hammer . How like you this
picture , brother of the thunder ? Nay , Heimdal ' s plan is a good one , and
I myself will help to carry it out . " 

Still Thor hesitated; but Freia came and laid her white hand on his arm , 
and looked up into his scowling face pleadingly . 

 " To save me , Thor , " she begged . And Thor said he would go . 

Then there was great sport among the AEsir , while they dressed Thor like
a beautiful maiden . Brunhilde and her sisters , the nine Valkyrie , 
daughters of Odin , had the task in hand . How they laughed as they
brushed and curled his yellow hair , and set upon it the wondrous
headdress of silk and pearls ! They let out seams , and they let down
hems , and set on extra pieces , to make it larger , and so they hid his
great limbs and knotted arms under Freia ' s fairest robe of scarlet; but
beneath it all he would wear his shirt of mail and his belt of power
that gave him double strength . Freia herself twisted about his neck her
famous necklace of starry jewels , and Queen Frigg , his mother , hung at
his girdle a jingling bunch of keys , such as was the custom for the
bride to wear at Norse weddings . Last of all , that Thrym might not see
Thor ' s fierce eyes and the yellow beard , that ill became a maiden , they
threw over him a long veil of silver white which covered him to the
feet . And there he stood , as stately and tall a bride as even a giant
might wish to see; but on his hands he wore his iron gloves , and they
ached for but one thing--to grasp the handle of the stolen hammer . 

 " Ah , what a lovely maid it is ! " chuckled Loki;  " and how glad will Thrym
be to see this Freia come ! Bride Thor , I will go with you as your
handmaiden , for I would fain see the fun . " 

 " Come , then , " said Thor sulkily , for he was ill pleased , and wore his
maiden robes with no good grace .  " It is fitting that you go; for I like
not these lies and masking and I may spoil the mummery without you at my
elbow . " 

There was loud laughter above the clouds when Thor , all veiled and
dainty seeming , drove away from Asgard to his wedding , with maid Loki by
his side . Thor cracked his whip and chirruped fiercely to his twin goats
with golden hoofs , for he wanted to escape the sounds of mirth that
echoed from the rainbow bridge , where all the AEsir stood watching . Loki , 
sitting with his hands meekly folded like a girl , chuckled as he glanced
up at Thor ' s angry face; but he said nothing , for he knew it was not
good to joke too far with Thor , even when Milönir was hidden twelve
leagues below the sea in Ran ' s kingdom . 

So off they dashed to Jotunheim , where Thrym was waiting and longing for
his beautiful bride . Thor ' s goats thundered along above the sea and land
and people far below , who looked up wondering as the noise rolled
overhead .  " Hear how the thunder rumbles ! " they said .  " Thor is on a long
journey to-night . " And a long journey it was , as the tired goats found
before they reached the end . 

Thrym heard the sound of their approach , for his ear was eager .  " Hola ! " 
he cried .  " Someone is coming from Asgard--only one of Odin ' s children
could make a din so fearful . Hasten , men , and see if they are bringing
Freia to be my wife . " 

Then the lookout giant stepped down from the top of his mountain , and
said that a chariot was bringing two maidens to the door . 

 " Run , giants , run ! " shouted Thrym , in a fever at this news .  " My bride is
coming ! Put silken cushions on the benches for a great banquet , and make
the house beautiful for the fairest maid in all space ! Bring in all my
golden-horned cows and my coal-black oxen , that she may see how rich I
am , and heap all my gold and jewels about to dazzle her sweet eyes ! She
shall find me richest of the rich; and when I have her--fairest of the
fair--there will be no treasure that I lack--not one ! " 

The chariot stopped at the gate , and out stepped the tall bride , hidden
from head to foot , and her handmaiden muffled to the chin .  " How afraid
of catching cold they must be ! " whispered the giant ladies , who were
peering over one another ' s shoulders to catch a glimpse of the bride , 
just as the crowd outside the awning does at a wedding nowadays . 

Thrym had sent six splendid servants to escort the maidens: these were
the Metal Kings , who served him as lord of them all . There was the Gold
King , all in cloth of gold , with fringes of yellow bullion , most
glittering to see; and there was the Silver King , almost as gorgeous in
a suit of spangled white; and side by side bowed the dark Kings of Iron
and Lead , the one mighty in black , the other sullen in blue; and after
them were the Copper King , gleaming ruddy and brave , and the Tin King , 
strutting in his trimmings of gaudy tinsel which looked nearly as well
as silver , but were more economical . And this fine troop of lackey kings
most politely led Thor and Loki into the palace , and gave them of the
best , for they never suspected who these seeming maidens really were . 

And when evening came there was a wonderful banquet to celebrate the
wedding . On a golden throne sat Thrym , uglier than ever in his finery of
purple and gold . Beside him was the bride , of whose face no one had yet
caught even a glimpse; and at Thrym ' s other hand stood Loki , the waiting
maid , for he wanted to be near to mend the mistakes which Thor might
make . 

Now the dishes at the feast were served in a huge way , as befitted the
table of giants: great beeves roasted whole , on platters as wide across
as a ship ' s deck; plum puddings as fat as feather beds , with plums as
big as footballs; and a wedding cake like a snow-capped hay mow . The
giants ate enormously . But to Thor , because they thought him a dainty
maiden , they served small bits of everything on a tiny gold dish . Now
Thor ' s long journey had made him very hungry , and through his veil he
whispered to Loki ,  " I shall starve , Loki ! I cannot fare on these
nibbles . I must eat a goodly meal as I do at home . " And forthwith he
helped himself to such morsels as might satisfy his hunger for a little
time . You should have seen the giants stare at the meal which the dainty
bride devoured ! 

For first under the silver veil disappeared by pieces a whole roast ox . 
Then Thor made eight mouthfuls of eight pink salmon , a dish of which he
was very fond . And next he looked about and reached for a platter of
cakes and sweetmeats that was set aside at one end of the table for the
lady guests , and the bride ate them all . You can fancy how the damsels
drew down their mouths and looked at one another when they saw their
dessert disappear; and they whispered about the table ,  " Alack ! if our
future mistress is to sup like this day by day , there will be poor cheer
for the rest of us ! " And to crown it all , Thor was thirsty , as well he
might be; and one after another he raised to his lips and emptied three
great barrels of mead , the foamy drink of the giants . Then indeed Thrym
was amazed , for Thor ' s giant appetite had beaten that of the giants
themselves . 

 " Never before saw I a bride so hungry , " he cried .  " And never before one
half so thirsty ! " 

But Loki , the waiting maid , whispered to him softly ,  " The truth is , 
great Thrym , that my dear mistress was almost starved . For eight days
Freia has eaten nothing at all , so eager was she for Jotunheim . " 

Then Thrym was delighted , you may be sure . He forgave his hungry bride , 
and loved her with all his heart . He leaned forward to give her a kiss , 
raising a corner of her veil; but his hand dropped suddenly , and he
started up in terror , for he had caught the angry flash of Thor ' s eye , 
which was glaring at him through the bridal veil . Thor was longing for
his hammer . 

 " Why has Freia so sharp a look ? " Thrym cried .  " It pierces like lightning
and burns like fire . " 

But again the sly waiting maid whispered timidly ,  " Oh , Thrym , be not
amazed ! The truth is , my poor mistress ' s eyes are red with wakefulness
and bright with longing . For eight nights Freia has not known a wink of
sleep , so eager was she for Jotunheim . " 

Then again Thrym was doubly delighted , and he longed to call her his
very own dear wife .  " Bring in the wedding gift ! " he cried .  " Bring in
Thor ' s hammer , Miölnir , and give it to Freia , as I promised; for when I
have kept my word she will be mine--all mine ! " 

Then Thor ' s big heart laughed under his woman ' s dress , and his fierce
eyes swept eagerly down the hall to meet the servant who was bringing in
the hammer on a velvet cushion . Thor ' s fingers could hardly wait to
clutch the stubby handle which they knew so well; but he sat quite still
on the throne beside ugly old Thrym , with his hands meekly folded and
his head bowed like a bashful bride . 

The giant servant drew nearer , nearer , puffing and blowing , strong
though he was , beneath the mighty weight . He was about to lay it at
Thor ' s feet  ( for he thought it so heavy that no maiden could lift it or
hold it in her lap ) , when suddenly Thor ' s heart swelled , and he gave a
most unmaidenly shout of rage and triumph . With one swoop he grasped the
hammer in his iron fingers; with the other arm he tore off the veil that
hid his terrible face , and trampled it under foot; then he turned to the
frightened king , who cowered beside him on the throne . 

 " Thief ! " he cried .  " Freia sends you _this_ as a wedding gift ! " And he
whirled the hammer about his head , then hurled it once , twice , thrice , 
as it rebounded to his hand; and in the first stroke , as of lightning , 
Thrym rolled dead from his throne; in the second stroke perished the
whole giant household--these ugly enemies of the AEsir; and in the third
stroke the palace itself tumbled together and fell to the ground like a
toppling playhouse of blocks . 

But Loki and Thor stood safely among the ruins , dressed in their
tattered maiden robes , a quaint and curious sight; and Loki , full of
mischief now as ever , burst out laughing . 

 " Oh , Thor ! if you could see-- " he began; but Thor held up his hammer and
shook it gently as he said:

 " Look now , Loki: it was an excellent joke , and so far you have done
well--after your crafty fashion , which likes me not . But now I have my
hammer again , and the joke is done . From you , nor from another , I brook
no laughter at my expense . Henceforth we will have no mention of this
masquerade , nor of these rags which now I throw away . Do you hear , red
laughter ? " 

And Loki heard , with a look of hate , and stifled his laughter as best he
could; for it is not good to laugh at him who holds the hammer . 

Not once after that was there mention in Asgard of the time when Thor
dressed him as a girl and won his bridal gift from Thrym the giant . 

But Miölnir was safe once more in Asgard , and you and I know how it came
there; so someone must have told . I wonder if red Loki whispered the
tale to some outsider , after all ? Perhaps it may be so , for now he knew
how best to make Thor angry; and from that day when Thor forbade his
laughing , Loki hated him with the mean little hatred of a mean little
soul . 


