An old chieftain sat in his wigwam , quietly smoking his favourite pipe , 
when a crowd of Indian boys and girls suddenly entered , and , with
numerous offerings of tobacco , begged him to tell them a story , and he
did so . 

There was once a time when this world was filled with happy people; when
all the nations were as one , and the crimson tide of war had not begun
to roll . Plenty of game was in the forest and on the plains . None were
in want , for a full supply was at hand . Sickness was unknown . The beasts
of the field were tame; they came and went at the bidding of man . One
unending spring gave no place for winter--for its cold blasts or its
unhealthy chills . Every tree and bush yielded fruit . Flowers carpeted
the earth . The air was laden with their fragrance , and redolent with the
songs of wedded warblers that flew from branch to branch , fearing none , 
for there were none to harm them . There were birds then of more
beautiful song and plumage than now . It was at such a time , when earth
was a paradise and man worthily its possessor , that the Indians were
lone inhabitants of the American wilderness . They numbered millions;
and , living as nature designed them to live , enjoyed its many blessings . 
Instead of amusements in close rooms , the sport of the field was theirs . 
At night they met on the wide green beneath the heavenly worlds--the
_ah-nung-o-kah_ . They watched the stars; they loved to gaze at them , 
for they believed them to be the residences of the good , who had been
taken home by the Great Spirit . 

One night they saw one star that shone brighter than all others . Its
location was far away in the south , near a mountain peak . For many
nights it was seen , till at length it was doubted by many that the star
was as far distant in the southern skies as it seemed to be . This doubt
led to an examination , which proved the star to be only a short distance
away , and near the tops of some trees . A number of warriors were deputed
to go and see what it was . They went , and on their return said it
appeared strange , and somewhat like a bird . A committee of the wise men
were called to inquire into , and if possible to ascertain the meaning
of , the strange phenomenon . They feared that it might be the omen of
some disaster . Some thought it a precursor of good , others of evil; and
some supposed it to be the star spoken of by their forefathers as the
forerunner of a dreadful war . 

One moon had nearly gone by , and yet the mystery remained unsolved . One
night a young warrior had a dream , in which a beautiful maiden came and
stood at his side , and thus addressed him:  " Young brave ! charmed with
the land of my forefathers , its flowers , its birds , its rivers , its
beautiful lakes , and its mountains clothed with green , I have left my
sisters in yonder world to dwell among you . Young brave ! ask your wise
and your great men where I can live and see the happy race continually;
ask them what form I shall assume in order to be loved . " 

Thus discoursed the bright stranger . The young man awoke . On stepping
out of his lodge he saw the star yet blazing in its accustomed place . At
early dawn the chief ' s crier was sent round the camp to call every
warrior to the council lodge . When they had met , the young warrior
related his dream . They concluded that the star that had been seen in
the south had fallen in love with mankind , and that it was desirous to
dwell with them . 

The next night five tall , noble-looking , adventurous braves were sent to
welcome the stranger to earth . They went and presented to it a pipe of
peace , filled with sweet-scented herbs , and were rejoiced that it took
it from them . As they returned to the village , the star , with expanded
wings , followed , and hovered over their homes till the dawn of day . 
Again it came to the young man in a dream , and desired to know where it
should live and what form it should take . Places were named--on the top
of giant trees , or in flowers . At length it was told to choose a place
itself , and it did so . At first it dwelt in the white rose of the
mountains; but there it was so buried that it could not be seen . It went
to the prairie; but it feared the hoof of the buffalo . It next sought
the rocky cliff; but there it was so high that the children , whom it
loved most , could not see it . 

 " I know where I shall live , " said the bright fugitive-- " where I can see
the gliding canoe of the race I most admire . Children ! --yes , they shall
be my playmates , and I will kiss their slumber by the side of cool
lakes . The nation shall love me wherever I am . " 

These words having been said , she alighted on the waters , where she saw
herself reflected . The next morning thousands of white flowers were seen
on the surface of the lakes , and the Indians gave them this name , 
_wah-be-gwan-nee_  ( white flower ) . 

This star lived in the southern skies . Her brethren can be seen far off
in the cold north , hunting the Great Bear , whilst her sisters watch her
in the east and west . 

Children ! when you see the lily on the waters , take it in your hands and
hold it to the skies , that it may be happy on earth , as its two sisters , 
the morning and evening stars , are happy in heaven . 
﻿Little Cyclone is a grizzly cub from Alaska , who earned his name by
the vigor of his resistance to ill treatment . When his mother was
fired at , on a timbered hillside facing Chilkat River , he and his
brother ran away as fast as their stumpy little legs could carry
them . When they crept where they had last seen her , they thought
her asleep; and cuddling up close against her yet warm body they
slept peacefully until morning . 

Before the early morning sun had reached their side of the
mountains , the two orphans were awakened by the rough grasp of
human hands . Valiantly they bit and scratched , and bawled aloud
with rage . One of them made a fight so fierce and terrible that his
nervous captor let him go , and that one is still on the Chilkoot . 

Although the other cub fought just as desperately , his captor
seized him by the hind legs , dragged him backwards , occasionally
swung him around his head , and kept him generally engaged until
ropes were procured for binding him . When finally established , with
collar , chain and post , in the rear of the saloon in Porcupine
City , two-legged animals less intelligent than himself frequently
and violently prodded the little grizzly with a long pole  " to see
him fight . " Barely in time to save him from insanity , little
Cyclone was rescued by the friendly hands of the Zoological
Society ' s field agent , placed in a comfortable box , freed from all
annoyance , and shipped to New York . 

He was at that time as droll and roguish-looking a grizzly cub as
ever stepped . In a grizzly-gray full moon of fluffy hair , two big
black eyes sparkled like jet beads , behind a pudgy little nose , 
absurdly short for a bear . Excepting for his high shoulders , he was
little more than a big bale of gray fur set up on four posts of the
same material . But his claws were formidable , and he had the true
grizzly spirit . 

The Bears ' Nursery at the New York Zoological Park is a big yard
with a shade tree , a tree to climb , a swimming pool , three sleeping
dens , and a rock cliff . It never contains fewer than six cubs , and
sometimes eight . 

Naturally , it is a good test of courage and temper to turn a new
bear into that roystering crowd . Usually a newcomer is badly scared
during his first day in the Nursery , and very timid during the
next . But grizzlies are different . They are born full of courage
and devoid of all sense of fear . 

When little Cyclone ' s travelling box was opened , and he found
himself free in the Nursery , he stalked deliberately to the centre
of the stage , halted , and calmly looked about him . His air and
manner said as plainly as English:  " I ' m a grizzly from Alaska , and
I ' ve come to stay . If any of you fellows think there is anything
coming to you from me , come and take it . " 

Little Czar , a very saucy but good-natured European brown bear cub , 
walked up and aimed a sample blow at Cyclone ' s left ear . Quick as a
flash out shot Cyclone ' s right paw , as only a grizzly can strike , 
and caught the would-be hazer on the side of the head . Amazed and
confounded , Czar fled in wild haste . Next in order , a black bear
cub , twice the size of Cyclone , made a pass at the newcomer , and he
too received so fierce a countercharge that he ignominiously
quitted the field and scrambled to the top of the cliff . 

Cyclone conscientiously met every attack , real or feigned , that was
made upon him . In less than an hour it was understood by every bear
in the Nursery that that queer-looking gray fellow with the broad
head and short nose could strike quick and hard , and that he could
fight any other bear on three seconds ' notice . 

From that time on Cyclone ' s position has been assured . He is
treated with the respect that a good forearm inspires , but being
really a fine-spirited , dignified little grizzly , he attacks no
one , and never has had a fight . 




SOME TRUE STORIES OF TIGERS , WOLVES , FOXES AND BEARS

By W . H . G . Kingston


On one of her voyages from China , the Pitt , East Indiaman , had on
board , among her passengers , a young tiger . He appeared to be as
harmless and playful as a kitten , and allowed the utmost
familiarity from every one . He was especially fond of creeping into
the sailors ' hammocks; and while he lay stretched on the deck , he
would suffer two or three of them to place their heads on his back , 
as upon a pillow . Now and then , however , he would at dinner-time
run off with pieces of their meat; and though sometimes severely
punished for the theft , he bore the chastisement he received with
the patience of a dog . His chief companion was a terrier , with whom
he would play all sorts of tricks--tumbling and rolling over the
animal in the most amusing manner , without hurting it . He would
also frequently run out on the bowsprit , and climb about the
rigging with the agility of a cat . 

On his arrival in England , he was sent to the menagerie at the
Tower . While there , another terrier was introduced into his den . 
Possibly he may have mistaken it for his old friend , for he
immediately became attached to the dog , and appeared uneasy
whenever it was taken away . Now and then the dangerous experiment
was tried of allowing the terrier to remain while the tiger was
fed . Presuming on their friendship , the dog occasionally ventured
to approach him; but the tiger showed his true nature on such
occasions by snarling in a way which made the little animal quickly
retreat . 

He had been in England two years , when one of the seamen of the
_Pitt_ came to the Tower . The animal at once recognized his
old friend , and appeared so delighted , that the sailor begged to be
allowed to go into the den . The tiger , on this , rubbed himself
against him , licked his hands , and fawned on him as a cat would
have done . The sailor remained in the den for a couple of hours or
more , during which time the tiger kept so close to him , that it was
evident he would have some difficulty in getting out again , without
the animal making his escape at the same time . The den consisted of
two compartments . At last the keeper contrived to entice the tiger
to the inner one , when he closed the slide , and the seaman was
liberated . 

Even a wolf , savage as that animal is , may , if caught young , and
treated kindly , become tame . 

A story is told of a wolf which showed a considerable amount of
affection for its master . He had brought it up from a puppy , and it
became as tame as the best-trained dog , obeying him in everything . 
Having frequently to leave home , and not being able to take the
wolf with him , he sent it to a menagerie , where he knew it would be
carefully looked after . At first the wolf was very unhappy , and
evidently pined for its absent master . At length , resigning itself
to its fate , it made friends with its keepers , and recovered its
spirits . 

Fully eighteen months had passed by , when its old master , returning
home , paid a visit to the menagerie . Immediately he spoke , the wolf
recognized his voice , and made strenuous efforts to get free . On
being set at liberty it sprang forward , and leaped up and caressed
him like a dog . Its master , however , left it with its keepers , and
three years passed away before he paid another visit to the
menagerie . Notwithstanding this lapse of time , the wolf again
recognized him , and exhibited the same marks of affection . 

On its master again going away , the wolf became gloomy and
desponding , and refused its food , so that fears were entertained
for its life . 

It recovered its health , however , and though it suffered its
keepers to approach , exhibited the savage disposition of its tribe
towards all strangers . 

The history of this wolf shows you that the fiercest tempers may be
calmed by gentleness . 

Arrant thieves as foxes are , with regard to their domestic virtues
they eminently shine . Both parents take the greatest interest in
rearing and educating their offspring . They provide , in their
burrow , a comfortable nest , lined with feathers , for their new-born
cubs . Should either parent perceive in the neighbourhood of their
abode the slightest sign of human approach , they immediately carry
their young to a spot of greater safety , sometimes many miles away . 
They usually set off in the twilight of a fine evening . The papa
fox having taken a survey all round , marches first , the young ones
march singly , and mamma brings up the rear . On reaching a wall or
bank , papa always mounts first , and looks carefully around , rearing
himself on his haunches to command a wider view . He then utters a
short cry , which the young ones , understanding as  " Come along ! " 
instantly obey . All being safely over , mamma follows , pausing in
her turn on the top of the fence , when she makes a careful survey , 
especially rearward . She then gives a responsive cry , answering to
 " All right ! " and follows the track of the others . Thus the party
proceed on their march , repeating the same precautions at each
fresh barrier . 

When peril approaches , the wary old fox instructs his young ones to
escape with turns and doublings on their path , while he himself
will stand still on some brow or knoll , where he can both see and
be seen . Having thus drawn attention to himself , he will take to
flight in a different direction . Occasionally , while the young
family are disporting themselves near their home , if peril
approach , the parents utter a quick , peculiar cry , commanding the
young ones to hurry to earth; knowing that , in case of pursuit , 
they have neither strength nor speed to secure their escape . They
themselves will then take to flight , and seek some distant place of
security . 

The instruction they afford their young is varied . Sometimes the
parents toss bones into the air for the young foxes to catch . If
the little one fails to seize it before it falls to the ground , the
parent will snap at him in reproof . If he catches it cleverly , papa
growls his approval , and tosses it up again . This sport continues
for a considerable time . 

As I have said , no other animals so carefully educate their young
in the way they should go , as does the fox . He is a good husband , 
an excellent father , capable of friendship , and a very intelligent
member of society; but all the while , it must be confessed , an
incorrigible rogue and thief . 

A gentleman was lying one summer ' s day under the shelter of some
shrubs on the banks of the Tweed , when his attention was attracted
by the cries of wild-fowl , accompanied by a great deal of
fluttering and splashing . On looking round , he perceived a large
brood of ducks , which had been disturbed by the drifting of a fir
branch among them . After circling in the air for a little time , 
they again settled down on their feeding-ground . 

Two or three minutes elapsed , when the same event again occurred . A
branch drifted down with the stream into the midst of the ducks , 
and startled them from their repast . Once more they rose upon the
wing , clamouring loudly , but when the harmless bough had drifted
by , settled themselves down upon the water as before . This occurred
so frequently , that at last they scarcely troubled themselves to
flutter out of the way , even when about to be touched by the
drifting bough . 

The gentleman , meantime , marking the regular intervals at which the
fir branches succeeded each other in the same track , looked for a
cause , and perceived , at length , higher up the bank of the stream , 
a fox , which , having evidently sent them adrift , was eagerly
watching their progress and the effect they produced . Satisfied
with the result , cunning Reynard at last selected a larger branch
of spruce-fir than usual , and couching himself down on it , set it
adrift as he had done the others . The birds , now well trained to
indifference , scarcely moved till he was in the midst of them , 
when , making rapid snaps right and left , he secured two fine young
ducks as his prey , and floated forward triumphantly on his raft;
while the surviving fowls , clamouring in terror , took to flight , 
and returned no more to the spot . 

A labourer going to his work one morning sight of a fox stretched
out at full length under a bush . Believing it to be dead , the man
drew it out by the tail , and swung it about to assure himself of
the fact . Perceiving no symptoms of life , he then threw it over his
shoulder , intending to make a cap of the skin , and ornament his
cottage wall with the brush . While the fox hung over one shoulder , 
his mattock balanced it on the other . The point of the instrument , 
as he walked along , every now and then struck against the ribs of
the fox , which , not so dead as the man supposed , objected to this
proceeding , though he did not mind being carried along with his
head downward . Losing patience , he gave a sharp snap at that
portion of the labourer ' s body near which his head hung . The man , 
startled by this sudden attack , threw fox and mattock to the
ground , when , turning round , he espied the live animal making off
at full speed . 

I have still another story to tell about cunning Reynard . Daylight
had just broke , when a well-known naturalist , gun in hand , 
wandering in search of specimens , observed a large fox making his
way along the skirts of a plantation . Reynard looked cautiously
over the turf-wall into the neighbouring field , longing evidently
to get hold of some of the hares feeding in it , well aware that he
had little chance of catching one by dint of running . After
examining the different gaps in the wall , he fixed on one which
seemed to be the most frequented , and laid himself down close to
it , in the attitude of a cat watching a mouse-hole . He next scraped
small hollow in the ground , to form a kind of screen . Now and then
he stopped to listen , or take a cautious peep into the field . This
done , he again laid himself down , and remained motionless , except
when occasionally his eagerness induced him to reconnoitre the
feeding hares . 

One by one , as the sun rose , they made their way from the field to
the plantation . Several passed , but he moved not , except to crouch
still closer to the ground . At length two came directly towards
him . The involuntary motion of his ears , though he did not venture
to look up , showed that he was aware of their approach . Like
lightning , as they were leaping through the gap , Reynard was upon
them , and catching one , killed her immediately . He was decamping
with his booty , when a rifle-ball put an end to his career . 

I must tell you one more story about a fox , and a very interesting
little animal it was , though not less cunning than its relatives in
warmer regions . 

Mr . Hayes , the Arctic explorer , had a beautiful little snow-white
fox , which was his companion in his cabin when his vessel was
frozen up during the winter . She had been caught in a trap , but
soon became tame , and used to sit in his lap during meals , with her
delicate paws on the cloth . A plate and fork were provided for her , 
though she was unable to handle the fork herself; and little bits
of raw venison , which she preferred to seasoned food . When she took
the morsels into her mouth , her eyes sparkled with delight . She
used to wipe her lips , and look up at her master with a
_coquetterie_ perfectly irresistible . Sometimes she exhibited
much impatience; but a gentle rebuke with a fork on the tip of the
nose was sufficient to restore her patience . 

When sufficiently tame , she was allowed to run loose in the cabin;
but she got into the habit of bounding over the shelves , without
much regard for the valuable and perishable articles lying on them . 

She soon also found out the bull ' s-eye overhead , through the cracks
round which she could sniff the cool air . Close beneath it she
accordingly took up her abode; and thence she used to crawl down
when dinner was on the table , getting into her master ' s lap , and
looking up longingly and lovingly into his face , sometimes putting
out her little tongue with impatience , and barking , if the
beginning of the repast was too long delayed . 

To prevent her climbing , she was secured by a slight chain . This
she soon managed to break , and once having performed the operation , 
she did not fail to attempt it again . To do this , she would first
draw herself back as far as she could get , and then suddenly dart
forward , in the hope of snapping it by the jerk; and though she was
thus sent reeling on the floor , she would again pick herself up , 
panting as if her little heart would break , shake out her
disarranged coat , and try once more . When observed , however , she
would sit quietly down , cock her head cunningly on one side , follow
the chain with her eye along its whole length to its fastening on
the floor , walk leisurely to that point , hesitating a moment , and
then make another plunge . All this time she would eye her master
sharply , and if he moved , she would fall down on the floor at once , 
and pretend to be asleep . 

She was a very neat and cleanly creature , everlastingly brushing
her clothes , and bathing regularly in a bath of snow provided for
her in the cabin . This last operation was her great delight . She
would throw up the white flakes with her diminutive nose , rolling
about and burying herself in them , wipe her face with her soft
paws , and then mount to the side of the tub , looking round her
knowingly , and barking the prettiest bark that ever was heard . This
was her way of enforcing admiration; and being now satisfied with
her performance , she would give a goodly number of shakes to her
sparkling coat , then , happy and refreshed , crawl into her airy bed
in the bull ' s-eye , and go to sleep . 

The Indian believes the bear to be possessed not only of a
wonderful amount of sagacity , but of feelings akin to those of
human beings . Though most species are savage when irritated , some
of them occasionally exhibit good humour and kindness . 

A story is told of a man in Russia , who on an expedition in search
of honey , climbed into a high tree . The trunk was hollow , and he
discovered a large cone within . He was descending to obtain it , 
when he stuck fast . Unable to extricate himself , and too far from
home to make his voice heard , he remained in that uncomfortable
position for two days , sustaining his life by eating the honey . He
had become silent from despair , when , looking up , what was his
horror to see a huge bear above him , tempted by the same object
which had led him into his dangerous predicament , and about to
descend into the interior of the tree ! 

Bears--very wisely--when getting into hollows of rocks or trees , go
tail-end first , that they may be in a position to move out again
when necessary . No sooner , in spite of his dismay , did the tail of
the bear reach him , than the man caught hold of it . The animal , 
astonished at finding some big creature below him , when he only
expected to meet with a family of bees , against whose stings his
thick hide was impervious , quickly scrambled out again , dragging up
the man , who probably shouted right lustily . Be that as it may , the
bear waddled off at a quick rate , and the honey-seeker made his way
homeward , to relate his adventure , and relieve the anxiety of his
family . 

The brown bear , which lives in Siberia , may be considered among the
most good-natured of his tribe . Mr . Atkinson , who travelled in that
country , tells us that some peasants--a father and mother--had one
day lost two of their children , between four and six years of age . 
It was soon evident that their young ones had wandered away to a
distance from their home , and as soon as this discovery was made
they set off in search of them . 

Having proceeded some way through the wilds , they caught sight in
the distance of a large animal , which , as they got nearer , they
discovered to be a brown bear; and what was their horror to see
within its clutches their lost young ones ! Their sensations of
dismay were exchanged for astonishment , when they saw the children
running about , laughing , round the bear , sometimes taking it by the
paws , and sometimes pulling it by the tail . The monster , evidently
amused with their behaviour , treated them in the most affectionate
manner . One of the children now produced some fruit , with which it
fed its shaggy playfellow , while the other climbed up on its back , 
and sat there , fearlessly urging its strange steed to move on . The
parents gave way to cries of terror at seeing the apparent danger
to which their offspring were exposed . The little boy , however , 
having slipped off the bear ' s back , the animal , hearing the sound
of other voices , left the children , and retreated quietly into the
forest . 


