It was when James the Sixth was king in Scotland that the young
Wemyss of Logie got into sore trouble.

Wemyss of Logie was one of the king's courtiers; a tall, handsome
lad he was, and a favourite with both king and queen.

Now King James had brought his wife, Queen Anne, across the sea
to Scotland. Her home was in Denmark, and when she came, a royal
bride, to Scotland, she brought with her a few fair Danish maids.
She thought it would be dull in her new home unless she had some
of her own country-folk around her.

Among these maids was a tall, beautiful girl named Margaret
Twynlace. Her the queen loved well, and oft would she speak with
Margaret of their old free life in the country over the sea.

It chanced on a day that the young Laird of Logie was in
attendance upon the king, and the Danish maid, Margaret Twynlace,
in waiting upon the queen; and that day they two looked at each
other, and yet another day they two talked to each other, indeed
many were the times they met. And before long it was well known
at court that the young Laird of Logie loved the Danish maid
Margaret, and would marry her an he could.

But now trouble befell the young laird. He had been seen talking
with the Earl of Bothwell, and he a traitor to the king. Nor was
it alone that Wemyss of Logie had been seen to speak with
Bothwell. It was even said that he had letters written by the
traitor in his room at Holyrood.

No sooner had this rumour reached the king than orders were given
to search both young Logie himself and the room in which he was
used to sleep.

On his person no letters were found, but in his room, flung
carelessly into his trunk, lay a packet of letters tied and
sealed. And the seal was that of the traitor, the Earl of
Bothwell.

The young laird was taken at once before the king. He spoke in
his usual fearless tones.

'It is true,' said he, 'that I have ofttimes spoken to the Earl
of Bothwell, and it is true that I received from him the sealed
packet which was found in my trunk. But of that which is written
in the packet know I nought. The seal is, as you see, unbroken.
Nor knew I that the earl was still acting as traitor,' added the
lad, as he saw displeasure written on the face of the king.

But despite all he could say, the young laird was arrested as a
traitor and thrown into prison. Margaret Twynlace with her own
eyes saw Sir John Carmichael, keeper of the prison, turn the key
in the lock.

Margaret went quickly to the queen's house, but there did she
neither sew nor sing. She sat twining her fingers in and out,
while she cried, 'Woe is me that ever I was born, or that ever I
left my home in Denmark. I would I had never seen the young Laird
of Logie.' And then Margaret wept bitterly, for having seen the
young laird, she loved him well.

When the queen came to her bower, she was grieved to see her
favourite maid in tears. Yet had she no comfort to offer her, for
well she knew that, even should he wish it, little power had the
king to save the young Laird of Logie.

But the queen spoke kindly to the maid, and told her that she,
Margaret, might e'en go herself to King James to beg for the life
of the young Laird of Logie. For it was well known that the
sentence passed on him would be death.

Then Margaret Twynlace wiped from her face all traces of her
tears. She put on her soft green silk gown, and she combed out
her bonny yellow hair. Thus she went into the presence of the
king and fell on her knee before him.

'Why, May Margaret,' said the king, 'is it thou? What dost thou
at my feet, my bonny maid?'

'Ah, sire,' cried she, 'I have come to beg of thee a boon. Nor
ever since I came over the sea have I begged of thee until now.
Give me, I beseech of thee, the life of the young Laird of
Logie.'

'Alas, May Margaret,' cried the king, 'that cannot I do! An thou
gavest to me all the gold that is in Scotland yet could I not
save the lad.'

Then Margaret Twynlace turned away and crept back to the queen's
bower. Yet now no tears fell from her blue eyes, for if neither
king nor queen could help the young Laird of Logie, she herself
would save him from death.

She would wait until night, when the king and queen slumbered,
and then she would carry out her plan. A brave plan it was, for
Margaret Twynlace was no coward maid.

Quiet and patient she waited in the little ante-room, close to
the queen's bedchamber, waited until she felt sure the royal pair
were fast asleep. Then tripping lightly on tiptoe, she stole
into the bedroom, where, as she had guessed, both king and queen
were slumbering sound.

She crossed the room, quiet as any mouse, and reached the toilet
table. There lay the king's gold comb, and close to it the little
pearl knife, the king's wedding gift to his queen.

Back tripped Margaret, still on tiptoe, to the ante-room, and
stood, her breath coming quick.

Had she roused the king or queen? Was that the bed creaking?

No, there was not a sound. The royal pair slept sound as before.

Then downstairs in the dark fled Margaret, down to the room where
Sir John Carmichael lay slumbering, without a thought of his
prisoner, the young Laird of Logie.

Loud did the maiden knock at his door, loud and long, until at
last Sir John was roused.

'Sir John,' cried the maid, 'haste thee and wake thy prisoner,
the young Laird of Logie, for the king would speak to him this
very moment. Open the door, for here be the tokens he sends to
thee,' and Margaret held out to Carmichael the gold comb and the
pearl knife.

Now, when Sir John had opened the door, he saw the tokens that
the maid held out to him. He knew them well and hastened to do
the king's will, rubbing his sleepy eyes the while, and muttering
under his breath, 'The king holds audience at strange hours; yet
must his orders be obeyed.'

He took the great key in his hand and went to the prison door.
Margaret followed close, her heart bounding, not wholly in fear,
nor yet wholly in hope.

Sir John turned the prison lock and roused the young Laird of
Logie from his dreams, saying only, 'The king would speak with
thee, without delay.'

Thus in the dead of night Margaret led the captain and his
prisoner to the door of the ante-room.

'Wait thou here, Sir John,' said the maid, until thy prisoner
returns.'

The young laird started as Margaret spoke. He had not guessed
that the maid wrapped in the rough cloak was his own dear
Margaret Twynlace.

But Sir John noticed nothing. He was wondering how long it would
be ere he would be again in his comfortable bed.

Margaret drew the prisoner into her own little room. He tried to
speak, but not a word would she let him utter. She led him to the
window, and shewed him a rope which she herself had fastened
there.

She pushed a purse of gold into his hand, a pistol into his belt,
and bade him shoot when he was free, that she might know that he
was safe. 'Then haste,' said Margaret, 'haste with all thy might
to the pier at Leith. Ships wilt thou find there in plenty to
carry thee into a safe haven.'

The young Laird of Logie would fain have tarried with the brave
Danish maid, but not a moment was there to lose. The king might
wake, Sir John might grow impatient and come in search of his
prisoner; thus whispered the maid as she urged young Wemyss of
Logie to flee.

He knew she spoke the truth, and he slipped down the rope, and in
a moment was standing on the ground. He hastened to the palace
gates, and getting safely through, he stayed only to fire his
pistol that Margaret Twynlace might know that no evil had
befallen.

When Margaret heard the shot she stole softly downstairs and
stood at the hall door gazing wistfully after the young Laird of
Logie. Yet not long dare she tarry there, lest the queen should
need her services. Noiselessly she crept back into the ante-room.
Hark! what was that? The king was moving! Indeed, the pistol-shot
had roused King James, and he jumped out of bed crying, 'That
pistol was fired by none other than the young Laird of Logie.'

He shouted for his guards and bade them go send their captain,
Sir John Carmichael, to his presence.

Sir John, fearing nothing, came before the king, and falling on
his knee before him he said, 'Sire, what is thy will?'

'Where is thy prisoner, where is the young Laird of Logie?'
demanded the king.

Sir John stared. Had not the king himself sent for his prisoner?

'The young Laird of Logie!' he said. 'Sire, thou didst send thy
tokens to me, a golden comb, a pearl knife. See, they are here,'
and Sir John drew them from his pocket and held them up before
the bewildered king.

'And with the tokens came an order to send my prisoner at once to
thy presence. I brought him to the door of the ante-room, where I
was bidden to wait thy will.'

'If thou hast played me false, Carmichael, if thou hast played me
false,' said the king, 'thou shalt thyself be tried to-morrow in
the court of justice in place of the prisoner, the young Laird of
Logie.'

Then Carmichael hastened to the door of the ante-room as fast as
ever he could go. And he called out, 'O young Wemyss of Logie, an
thou art within, come out, for I must speak to thee.'

Margaret Twynlace smiled to herself as she opened the door of the
ante-room. Carmichael stepped into the room, stopped short, and
stared. The open window, the rope that hung there, told him all
he had come to ask. He stared, but never a word did he find to
say.

Then maid Margaret laughed aloud and clapped her hands for glee.

'Dost wish thy prisoner, the Laird of Logie?' she cried. 'Thou
shalt not see him again for many a long day. Long ere the morning
dawned he was on board one of the ships at Leith, and now he is
sailing on the sea. He is free, he is free!'

King James did not punish the brave Danish maid. Nor when he
heard from Queen Anne all that the maid had done did he blame Sir
John Carmichael.

Indeed ere many months had passed away the king sent a pardon to
the young laird. Then was he not long in coming back to bonny
Scotland to marry brave Margaret Twynlace, who had saved his
life.