A pet grizzly bear had been for a number of years a feature
at Hartranft's . As a puny infant , barely able to crawl , Solomon , 
as he was solemnly dubbed , was brought in off the Teton Mountains , 
and as milk was scarcer than money at the horse-ranch , he was
aristocratically fed on malted milk . 

On this expensive diet the cub throve amazingly . Good feeding was
continued after his weaning from the rubber nipple , and at the end
of three years Solomon had grown to be a fat wooly monster . He was
kept chained to a post in the warm season , and had an enclosed
stall in a big barn for his winter quarters . Ordinarily he was
good-natured , but he was a rough and not altogether safe
playfellow . The near-by bawling of cattle always aroused in him
ebullitions of rage . 

"Solomon's got an awful grouch agin any noise bigger than what he
can make hisself , " was the saying of the ranch hands . 

When Joe Hartranft's sister , Mrs . Murray , and her two boys , Rufe
and Perry , came to the ranch to spend the month of June , Solomon
was promptly hustled into his stall in the barn . It was thought
best to have no boys fooling round the grizzly . 

This would undoubtedly have been the safest disposition , but for an
oversight of the "stable boss . " A big Percheron had been kept loose
in a closed stall adjoining Solomon's , and one day , when the bear's
voice was raised in remonstrance against his shrill neighing , he
had turned his heels loose against the partition which separated
them . His fierce battery had loosened two boards four or five feet
above the floor . And the cracks he made had gone unnoted , or at
least the mending had been neglected . 

A few days after the visitors came , a fine shorthorn cow with a new
calf was turned into the barn for the day . 

Men and work-horses were at work at the alfalfa-cutting , and the
bear and cow and calf were sole occupants of the barn when Rufe and
Perry mounted an outside ladder and entered its loft . 

This loft , with its grain-bins , its huge empty space , its
cross-beams and braces , offered an attractive gymnasium . In one of
the bins , used chiefly for storage , they discovered a lot of
fishing-tackle , seines and spears of various sorts for taking the
salmon which annually ran up the Snake River and its tributaries . 

They had ventured to drag out one of the seines and unroll it on
the floor of the loft , when the cow below them broke into
distressful bawling . Peering down a square aperture , through which
hay was lifted by machine forks in the season of storing , they saw
that the calf had got in between the wheels of two buggies which
were housed on one side of the driveway . 

The feeble creature was stuck fast enough , and the helpless dam
could only bellow her distress . The boys , in spite of some fear of
the cow , would have gone down to extricate the calf , but at this
instant Solomon roused in his lair , and took a hand in the
demonstration . 

His uproar became frightful as the cow , more than ever alarmed for
her calf , continued to bawl . There was a trap-door raised for
ventilation over Solomon's stall , and the boys ran eagerly to have
a look at the grizzly . 

They were highly entertained for a moment . Hair on end , teeth
gnashing , Solomon charged back and forth in his enclosure . Then he
reared up on his hind legs and clawed at the pine planks which shut
him in . He had not long continued this performance when his claws
caught in the crack of a loosened board . There was a ripping creak
and a crash , and down came the board . Another followed , and
Solomon , ceasing his violent threats for the instant , peered
through a wide gap into another domain . His hesitation was brief;
he scrambled through , walked out of the open door of the
horse-stall into an alley , and sought wider range . 

At first the boys were a little frightened , but they concluded that
Solomon would not be able to climb into the loft , and that it was
safer for them to stay above than to go down the ladder , for the
grizzly might easily push aside one of the half-dozen sliding doors
and get out of the barn . 

The barn was at a considerable distance from the house , so they
determined not to alarm the women unless Solomon should get outside
and so make it necessary . They sat for a time listening to the
monotonous bawling of the cow . Solomon seemed to have lost interest
in her noise , as they heard him now and then rummaging among the
empty stalls . 

They had begun to hope that the bear would not find his way out of
the stalls , when they heard him scrambling heavily . 

Then came a resounding thump as he dropped from one of the open
mangers to the floor of the barn . 

Almost instantly a terrific bawling and uproar broke out below . 
Solomon had reached the cow at last . The boys ran to the edge of
the hay-lift and peered down . The cow was directly underneath , had
backed up against the buggies , and stood tossing her head and
bawling like a crazy thing . 

Dropping their eyes below the level of the loft floor , the lads saw
Solomon coming round a pile of new alfalfa which had been unloaded
in front of the central stalls . His rage was terrific , although he
advanced slowly to the attack . 

He came under the wide opening and swayed back and forth before the
cow like a tiger in its cage , roaring his threats and watching for
an opening to get by the lowered horns . He was a creature of
instinct , and with a veteran's precaution before a wicked pair of
horns . 

Nevertheless the cow , in a lightning charge , caught him broadside
on , and bore him , in a swift rush , into the midst of the heap of
clover . But for that soft padding for his ribs , it would have gone
hard with Solomon . He was doubled up and thrust into the soft mass , 
fighting wildly . 

Bear and cow were buried in a storm of clover and flying hay . They
twisted about . Then the bear got his back braced against a stall
and his hind feet against the cow , and he bowled her into the
middle of the barn . 

With a huge grunt she alighted on her side and rolled clean over . 
As she scrambled to her feet , full of pluck and snorting fiercely , 
Solomon issued from the midst of the alfalfa-heap , and again the
two faced each other , filling the barn with loudmouthed threats . 

It was a splendid and exciting battle , but Rufe and Perry , certain
that the bear would kill the cow unless prevented , felt that they
must do something . They had heard their Uncle Joe say that , since
Solomon was getting crosser , he would give him away if anybody
could be found to come and get him . 

Since nobody else was within reach , they cast about for some means
of distracting Solomon from his fell purpose . Better kill the bear , 
if possible , than let him destroy a valuable farm animal . Suddenly , 
as the bear came directly beneath , Perry bethought him of the
fish-spears . 

In a twinkling he had one in hand , and was standing over the wide
aperture . 

"That's it ! That's it ! " shouted Rufe . "Stab him ! Stick it clear
into him ! That'll keep him busy for a while ! "

Solomon was again weaving back and forth before the threatening
horns , and as he came within easy reach , Perry gave him a fierce
thrust between the shoulders . As the tines pierced his muscles , the
bear reared to his hind legs with a whining roar of pain . Perry , 
still clinging to the handle of the spear , was suddenly thrown off
his perch and tumbled head foremost upon the grizzly ! 

Thus the peril of breaking bones in falling was avoided in the
peril of rolling on the barn floor in the clutches of a mad
grizzly ! 

The bear had twisted his neck to seize the spear-handle , and when
Perry hit him , was bowled over on his side . 

The spear-handle snapped in his teeth , and as he wrenched
frantically at the fragment , its tines were twisted , cutting deeper
into his flesh . 

This wound , the first he had ever received , set Solomon crazy . 

He paid not the slightest heed to boy or cow , but rolled and
threshed , biting at the fragment of spear-handle , giving vent to
his rage and pain in a hoarse , distressful roar . 

Perry might easily have scrambled to his feet and escaped , but he
also was flung at full length on the floor , and instantly Solomon , 
in distress , rolled over him , crushing the breath from his lungs . 

The terrified Rufe , looking down upon his brother's blackened face
and the bear's wicked claws waving above it , leaped to his feet and
started to run to the barn-loft door , to scream for help . 

At less than half the distance , his feet caught in the meshes of
the unrolled net , and he measured his length on the floor . 

As he quickly untangled a foot , the thought flashed into his mind , 
"Throw this net upon the bear's legs ! " In a flash he was at the
edge of the open floor and hauling the big seine in coils at his
feet . 

When he had a heap to the height of his knees he gathered it in his
arms and dropped the coils upon Solomon's waving legs . 

The bear's claws took instant hold of the stout meshes , and bruin , 
feeling his feet entangled , wrenched at their fastenings , rolling
himself over on his side and off the body of the prostrate boy . 
Perry , well-nigh smothered , had barely strength enough to crawl out
of reach of the whirlwind fight which now took place . 

Even the cow was awed to silence by the uproar of Solomon's rage as
he fought with the entangling folds of the salmon net . 

The seine needed no attendance . It did its own work once the
grizzly's legs had been thrust through its meshes . 

Coil after coil , the hundred and fifty feet of seine came down out
of the loft as the bear rolled and pitched and tumbled . The more he
tore and threshed , the more meshes there were to enwrap and
entangle him . 

In five minutes from the time its first meshes dropped upon him , 
the net had Solomon so wound and bound that his legs were
immovable , and he could barely wriggle his neck . 

Perry soon recovered his breath , and before they ran to the field
to tell of Solomon's plight , the two boys had the presence of mind
to pen the cow up where she could not , should she take a notion , 
gore the helpless grizzly . 

Amid both laughter and commiseration , blended with comments on the
pluck of the two youngsters , the ranchmen performed a surgical
operation on the helpless Solomon , extracting the spear from his
flesh . With much greater difficulty they freed him from the seine
and got him back into his lair . 



A DROLL FOX-TRAP

By C . A . Stephens

When I was a boy I lived in one of those rustic neighborhoods on
the outskirts of the great "Maine woods . " Foxes were plenty , for
about all those sunny pioneer clearings birch-partridges breed by
thousands , as also field-mice and squirrels , making plenty of game
for Reynard . 

There were red foxes , "cross-grays , " and "silver-grays;" even black
foxes were reported . These animals were the pests of the
farm-yards , and made havoc with the geese , cats , turkeys , and
chickens . In the fall of the year , particularly after the frosts , 
the clearings were overrun by them night and morning . Their sharp , 
cur-like barks used often to rouse us , and of a dark evening we
would hear them out in the fields , "mousing" around the
stone-heaps , making a queer , squeaking sound like a mouse , to call
the real mice out of their grass nests inside the stone-heaps . 
This , indeed , is a favorite trick of Reynard . 

At the time of my story , my friend Tom Edwards ( ten years of age ) 
and myself were in the turkey business , equal partners . We owned a
flock of thirty-one turkeys . These roosted by night in a large
butternut tree in front of Tom's house--in the very top of it , and
by day they wandered about the edges of the clearings in quest of
beech-nuts , which were very plentiful that fall . 

All went well till the last week in October , when , on taking the
census one morning , a turkey was found to be missing; the
thirty-one had become thirty since nightfall the previous evening . 
It was the first one we had lost . 

We proceeded to look for traces . Our suspicions were divided . Tom
thought it was "the Twombly boys , " nefarious Sam in particular . I
thought it might have been an owl . But under the tree , in the soft
dirt , where the potatoes had recently been dug , we found
fox-tracks , and two or three ominous little wads of feathers , with
one long tail feather adrift . Thereupon we concluded that the
turkey had accidentally fallen down out of the butternut--had a
fit , perhaps--and that its flutterings had attracted the attention
of some passing fox , which had , forthwith , taken it in charge . It
was , as we regarded it , one of those unfortunate occurrences which
no care on our part could have well foreseen , and a casualty such
as turkey-raisers are unavoidably heirs to , and we bore our loss
with resignation . We were glad to remember that turkeys did not
often fall off their roosts . 

This theory received something of a check when our flock counted
only twenty-nine the next morning . There were more fox-tracks , and
a great many more feathers under the tree . This put a new and
altogether ugly aspect on the matter . No algebra was needed to
figure the outcome of the turkey business at this rate , together
with our prospective profits , in the light of this new fact . It was
clear that something must be done , and at once , too , or ruin would
swallow up the poultry firm . 

Rightly or wrongly , we attributed the mischief to a certain
"silver-gray" that had several times been seen in the neighborhood
that autumn . 

It would take far too much space to relate in detail the plans we
laid and put in execution to catch that fox during the next two
weeks . I recollect that we set three traps for him to no purpose , 
and that we borrowed a fox-hound to hunt him with , but merely
succeeded in running him to the burrow in a neighboring rocky
hill-side , whence we found it quite impossible to dislodge the wily
fellow . 

Meanwhile the fox ( or foxes ) had succeeded in getting two more of
the turkeys . 

Heroes , it is said , are born of great crises . This dilemma of ours
developed Tom's genius . 

"I'll have that fox , " he said , when the traps failed; and when the
hound proved of no avail he still said: "I'll have him yet . "

"But how ? " I asked . Tom said he would show me . He brought a
two-bushel basket and went out into the fields . In the stone-heaps , 
and beside the old logs and stumps , there were dozens of deserted
mouse-nests , each a wad of fine dry grass as large as a quart box . 
These were gathered up , and filled the great basket . 

"There , " said he , triumphantly , "don't them smell _mousey_ ? "

They did , certainly; they savored as strongly of mice as Tom's
question of bad grammar . 

"And don't foxes catch mice ? " demanded Tom , confidently . 

"Yes , but I don't see how that's going to catch the fox , " I said . 

"Well , look here , then , I'll show ye , " said he . "Play you's the
fox; and play 't was night , and you was prowling around the fields . 
Go off now out there by that stump . "

Full of wonder and curiosity , I retired to the stump . Tom , 
meantime , turned out the mass of nests , and with it completely
covered himself . The pile now resembled an enormous mouse-nest , or
rather a small hay-cock . Pretty soon I heard a low , high-keyed , 
squeaking noise , accompanied by a slight rustle inside the nest . 
Evidently there were mice in it; and , feeling my character as fox
at stake , I at once trotted forward , then crept up , and , as the
rustling and squeaking continued , made a pounce into the grass--as
I had heard it said that foxes did when mousing . Instantly two spry
brown hands from out the nest clutched me with a most vengeful
grip . As a fox , I struggled tremendously . But Tom overcame me
forthwith , choked me nearly black in the face , then , in dumb show , 
knocked my head with a stone . 

"D'ye see , now ! " he demanded . 

I saw . 

"But a fox would bite you , " I objected . 

"Let him bite , " said Tom . "I'll resk him when once I get these two
bread-hooks on him . And he can't smell me through the mouse-nests
either . "

That night we set ourselves to put the stratagem in operation . With
the dusk we stole out into the field where the stone-heaps were , 
and where we had oftenest heard foxes bark . Selecting a nook in the
edge of a clump of raspberry briars which grew about a great
pine-stump , Tom lay down , and I covered him up completely with the
contents of the big basket . He then practiced squeaking and
rustling several times to be sure that all was in good trim . His
squeaks were perfect successes--made by sucking the air sharply
betwixt his teeth . 

"Now be off , " said Tom , "and don't come poking around , nor get in
sight , till you hear me holler . "

Thus exhorted , I went into the barn and established myself at a
crack on the back side , which looked out upon the field where Tom
was ambushed . 

Tom , meanwhile , as he afterward told me , waited till it had grown
dark , then began squeaking and rustling at intervals , to draw the
attention of the fox when first he should come out into the
clearing , for foxes have ears so wonderfully acute , that they are
able to hear a mouse squeak twenty rods away , it is said . 

An hour passed . Tom must have grown pretty tired of squeaking . It
was a moonless evening , though not very dark . I could see objects
at a little distance through the crack , but could not see so far as
the stump . It got rather dull , watching there; and being amidst
nice cozy straw , I presently went to sleep , quite unintentionally . 
I must have slept some time , though it seemed to me but a very few
minutes . 

What woke me was a noise--a sharp suppressed yelp . It took me a
moment to understand where I was , and why I was there . A sound of
scuffling and tumbling on the ground at some distance assisted my
wandering wits , and I rushed out of the barn and ran toward the
field . As I ran , two or three dull whacks came to my ear . 

"Got him , Tom ? " I shouted , rushing up . 

Tom was holding and squeezing one of his hands with the other and
shaking it violently . He said not a word , and left me to poke about
and stumble on the limp warm carcass of a large fox that lay near . 

"Bite ye ? " I exclaimed , after satisfying myself that the fox was
dead . 

"Some , " said Tom; and that was all I could get from him that night . 

We took the fox to the house and lighted a candle . It was the
"silver-gray . "

Tom washed his bite in cold water and went to bed . Next morning he
was in a sorry and a very sore plight . His left hand was bitten
through the palm , and badly swollen . There was also a deep bite in
the fleshy part of his right arm , just below the elbow , several
minor nips in his left leg above the knee , and a ragged "grab" in
the chin . These numerous bites , however , were followed by no
serious ill effects . 

The next day , Tom told me that the fox had suddenly plunged into
the grass , that he had caught hold of one of its hind legs , and
that they had rolled over and over in the grass together . He owned
to me that when the fox bit him on the chin , he let go of the
brute , and would have given up the fight , but that the fox had then
actually attacked him . "Upon that , " said Tom , "I just determined to
have it out with him . "

Considering the fact that a fox is a very active , sharp-biting
animal , and that this was an unusually large male , I have always
thought Tom got off very well . I do not think that he ever cared to
make a fox-trap of himself again , however . 

We sold the fox-skin in the village , and received thirteen dollars
for it , whereas a common red fox-skin is worth no more than three
dollars . 

How , or by what wiles that fox got the turkeys out of the high
butternut , is a secret--one that perished with him . It would seem
that he must either have climbed the tree , or else have practiced
sorcery to make the turkey come down . 



THE HORSE THAT AROUSED THE TOWN

By Lillian M . Gask

A wise and just monarch was the good King John . His kingdom
extended over Central Italy , and included the famous town of Atri , 
which in days gone by had been a famous harbour on the shores of
the Adriatic . Now the sea had retreated from it , and it lay inland;
no longer the crested waves rolled on its borders , or tossed their
showers of silver spray to meet the vivid turquoise of the sky . 

The great desire of good King John was that every man , woman and
child in his dominions should be able to obtain justice without
delay , be they rich or poor . To this end , since he could not
possibly listen to all himself , he hung a bell in one of the city
towers , and issued a proclamation to say that when this was rung a
magistrate would immediately proceed to the public square and
administer justice in his name . The plan worked admirably; both
rich and poor were satisfied , and since they knew that evil-doers
would be quickly punished , and wrongs set right , men hesitated to
defraud or oppress their neighbours , and the great bell pealed less
often as years went on . 

In the course of time , however , the bell-rope wore thin , and some
ingenious citizen fastened a wisp of hay to it , that this might
serve as a handle . One day in the height of summer , when the
deserted square was blazing with sunlight , and most of the citizens
were taking their noonday rest , their siesta was disturbed by the
violent pealing of the bell . 

"Surely some great injustice has been done , " they cried , shaking
off their languor and hastening to the square . To their amazement
they found it empty of all human beings save themselves; no angry
supplicant appealed for justice , but a poor old horse , lame and
half blind , with bones that nearly broke through his skin , was
trying with pathetic eagerness to eat the wisp of hay . In
struggling to do this , he had rung the bell , and the judge , 
summoned so hastily for so slight a cause , was stirred to
indignation . 

"To whom does this wretched horse belong ? " he shouted wrathfully . 
"What business has it here ? "

"Sir , he belongs to a rich nobleman , who lives in that splendid
palace whose tall towers glisten white above the palm-grove , " said
an old man , coming forward with a deep bow . "Time was that he bore
his master to battle , carrying him dauntlessly amid shot and shell , 
and more than once saving his life by his courage and fleetness . 
When the horse became old and feeble , he was turned adrift , since
his master had no further use for him; and now the poor creature
picks up what food he can in highways and byways . "

On hearing this the judge's face grew dark with anger . "Bring his
master before me , " he thundered , and when the amazed nobleman
appeared , he questioned him more sternly than he would have done
the meanest peasant . 

"Is it true , " he demanded , "that you left this , your faithful
servant , to starve , since he could no longer serve you ? It is long
since I heard of such gross injustice--are you not ashamed ? "

The nobleman hung his head in silence; he had no word to say in his
own defence as with scathing contempt the judge rebuked him , adding
that in future he would neglect the horse at his peril . 

"For the rest of his life , " he said , "you shall care for the poor
beast as he deserves , so that after his long term of faithful
service he may end his days in peace . "

This decision was greeted with loud applause by the town folk , who
gathered in the square . 

"Our bell is superior to all others , " they said to each other , with
nods and smiles , "for it is the means of gaining justice , not only
for men , but for animals too in their time of need . "

And with shouts of triumph they led the old war-horse back to his
stable , knowing that for the future its miserly owner would not
dare to begrudge it the comfort to which it was so justly entitled . 



WHAT GINGER TOLD BLACK BEAUTY

By Anna Sewell

One day when Ginger and I were standing alone in the shade , we had
a great deal of talk; she wanted to know all about my bringing up
and breaking in , and I told her . 

"Well , " said she , "if I had had your bringing up , I might have had
as good a temper as you , but now I don't believe I ever shall . "

"Why not ? " I said . 

"Because it has been all so different with me , " she replied . "I
never had any one , horse or man , that was kind to me , or that I
cared to please , for in the first place I was taken from my mother
as soon as I was weaned , and put with a lot of other young colts;
none of them cared for me , and I cared for none of them . There was
no kind master like yours to look after me , and talk to me , and
bring me nice things to eat . The man that had the care of us never
gave me a kind word in my life . I do not mean that he ill-used me , 
but he did not care for us one bit further than to see that we had
plenty to eat , and shelter in the winter . A footpath ran through
our field and very often the great boys passing through would fling
stones to make us gallop . I was never hit , but one fine young colt
was badly cut in the face , and I should think it would be a scar
for life . We did not care for them , but of course it made us more
wild , and we settled it in our minds that boys were our enemies . We
had very good fun in the free meadows , galloping up and down and
chasing each other round and round the field; then standing still
under the shade of the trees . But when it came to breaking in , that
was a bad time for me; several men came to catch me , and when at
last they closed me in at one corner of the field , one caught me by
the forelock , another caught me by the nose and held it so tight I
could hardly draw my breath; then another took my under jaw in his
hard hand and wrenched my mouth open , and so by force they got on
the halter and the bar into my mouth; then one dragged me along by
the halter , another flogging behind , and this was the first
experience I had of men's kindness; it was all force . They did not
give me a chance to know what they wanted . I was high bred and had
a great deal of spirit and was very wild , no doubt , and gave them , 
I dare say , plenty of trouble , but then it was dreadful to be shut
up in a stall day after day instead of having my liberty , and I
fretted and pined and wanted to get loose . You know yourself it's
bad enough when you have a kind master and plenty of coaxing , but
there was nothing of that sort for me . 

"There was one--the old master , Mr . Ryder--who , I think , could soon
have brought me round , and could have done anything with me; but he
had given up all the hard part of the trade to his son and to
another experienced man , and he only came at times to oversee . His
son was a strong , tall , bold man; they called him Samson , and he
used to boast that he had never found a horse that could throw him . 
There was no gentleness in him , as there was in his father , but
only hardness , a hard voice , a hard eye , a hard hand; and I felt
from the first that what he wanted was to wear all the spirit out
of me , and just make me into a quiet , humble , obedient piece of
horse-flesh . 'Horse-flesh ! ' Yes , that is all that he thought
about , " and Ginger stamped her foot as if the very thought of him
made her angry . Then she went on:

"If I did not do exactly what he wanted , he would get put out , and
make me run round with that long rein in the training field till he
had tired me out . I think he drank a good deal , and I am quite sure
that the oftener he drank the worse it was for me . One day he had
worked me hard in every way he could , and when I lay down I was
tired , and miserable , and angry; it all seemed so hard . The next
morning he came for me early , and ran me round again for a long
time . I had scarcely had an hour's rest , when he came again for me
with a saddle and bridle and a new kind of bit . I could never quite
tell how it came about; he had only just mounted me on the training
ground , when something I did put him out of temper , and he chucked
me hard with the rein . The new bit was very painful , and I reared
up suddenly , which angered him still more , and he began to flog me . 
I felt my whole spirit set against him , and I began to kick , and
plunge , and rear as I had never done before , and we had a regular
fight; for a long time he stuck , to the saddle and punished me
cruelly with his whip and spurs , but my blood was thoroughly up , 
and I cared for nothing he could do if only I could get him off . At
last , after a terrible struggle , I threw him off backwards . I heard
him fall heavily on the turf , and , without looking behind me , I
galloped off to the other end of the field; there I turned round
and saw my persecutor slowly rising from the ground and going into
the stable . I stood under an oak tree and watched , but no one came
to catch me . The time went on , and the sun was very hot; the flies
swarmed round me and settled on my bleeding flanks where the spurs
had dug in . I felt hungry , for I had not eaten since the early
morning , but there was not enough grass in that meadow for a goose
to live on . I wanted to lie down and rest , but with the saddle
strapped tightly on , there was no comfort , and there was not a drop
of water to drink . The afternoon wore on , and the sun got low . I
saw the other colts led in , and I knew they were having a good
feed . 

"At last , just as the sun went down , I saw the old master come out
with a sieve in his hand . He was a very fine old gentleman with
quite white hair , but his voice was what I should know him by
amongst a thousand . It was not high , nor yet low , but full , and
clear , and kind , and when he gave orders it was so steady and
decided , that every one knew , both horses and men , that he expected
to be obeyed . He came quietly along , now and then shaking the oats
about that he had in the sieve , and speaking cheerfully and gently
to me: 'Come along , lassie , come along , lassie; come along , come
along . ' I stood still and let him come up; he held the oats to me , 
and I began to eat without fear; his voice took all my fear away . 
He stood by , patting and stroking me whilst I was eating , and
seeing the clots of blood on my side he seemed very vexed . 'Poor
lassie ! it was a bad business , a bad business ! ' Then he quietly
took the rein and led me to the stable; just at the door stood
Samson . I laid my ears back and snapped at him . 'Stand back , ' said
the master , 'and keep out of her way; you've done a bad day's work
for this filly . ' He growled out something about a vicious brute . 
'Hark ye , ' said the father , 'a bad-tempered man will never make a
good-tempered horse . You've not learned your trade yet , Samson . '
Then he led me into my box , took off the saddle and bridle with his
own hands , and tied me up; then he called for a pail of warm water
and a sponge , took off his coat , and while the stableman held the
pail , he sponged my sides a good while , so tenderly that I was sure
he knew how sore and bruised they were . 'Whoa ! my pretty one , ' he
said , 'stand still , stand still . ' His very voice did me good , and
the bathing was very comfortable . The skin was so broken at the
corners of my mouth that I could not eat the hay; the stalks hurt
me . He looked closely at it , shook his head , and told the man to
fetch a good bran mash and put some meal into it . How good that
mash was ! and so soft and healing to my mouth . He stood by all the
time I was eating , stroking me and talking to the man . 'If a
highmettled creature like this , ' said he , 'can't be broken in by
fair means , she will never be good for anything . '

"After that he often came to see me , and when my mouth was healed , 
the other breaker , Job , they called him , went on training me; he
was steady and thoughtful , and I soon learned what he wanted . "



SOME TRUE STORIES OP HORSES AND DONKEYS

By W . H . G . Kingston

The horse becomes the willing servant of man , and when kindly
treated looks upon him as a friend and protector . 

I have an interesting story to tell you of a mare which belonged to
Captain I-- , an old settler in New Zealand . She and her foal had
been placed in a paddock , between which and her master's residence , 
three or four miles away , several high fences intervened . The
paddock itself was surrounded by a still higher fence . 

One day , however , as Captain I--was standing with a friend in front
of his house , he was surprised to see the mare come galloping up . 
Supposing that the fence of her paddock had been broken down , and
that , pleased at finding herself at liberty , she had leaped the
others , he ordered a servant to take her back . The mare willingly
followed the man; but in a short time was seen galloping up towards
the house in as great a hurry as before . The servant , who arrived
some time afterwards , assured his master that he had put the mare
safely into the paddock . Captain I--told him again to take back the
animal , and to examine the fence more thoroughly , still believing
that it must have been broken down in some part or other , though
the gate might be secure . 

Captain I--and his friend then retired into the house , and were
seated at dinner , when the sound of horse's hoofs reached their
ears . The friend , who had on this got up to look out of the window , 
saw that it was the mare come back for the third time; and
observing the remarkable manner in which she was running up and
down , apparently trying even to get into the house , exclaimed , 
"What can that mare want ? I am sure that there is something the
matter . " Captain I--on hearing this hurried out to ascertain the
state of the case . No sooner did the mare see him than she began to
frisk about and exhibit the most lively satisfaction; but instead
of stopping to receive the accustomed caress , off she set again of
her own accord towards the paddock , looking back to ascertain
whether her master was following . His friend now joined him , and
the mare , finding that they were keeping close behind her , trotted
on till the gate of the paddock was reached , where she waited for
them . On its being opened , she led them across the field to a deep
ditch on the farther side , when , what was their surprise to find
that her colt had fallen into it , and was struggling on its back
with its legs in the air , utterly unable to extricate itself . In a
few minutes more probably it would have been dead . The mare , it was
evident , finding that the servant did not comprehend her wishes , 
had again and again sought her master , in whom she had learned from
past experience to confide . Here was an example of strong maternal
affection eliciting a faculty superior to instinct , which fully
merits the name of reason . 


The memory of horses is remarkable . The newsman of a country paper
was in the habit of riding his horse once or twice a week to the
houses of fifty or sixty of his customers , the horse invariably
stopping of his own accord at each house as he reached it . 

But the memory of the horse was exhibited in a still more curious
manner . It happened that there were two persons on the route who
took one paper between them , and each claimed the privilege of
having it first on each alternate week . The horse soon became
accustomed to this regulation , and though the parties lived two
miles distant , he stopped once a fortnight at the door of the
half-customer at one place , and once a fortnight at the door of the
half-customer at the other; and never did he forget this
arrangement , which lasted for several years . 

I was once travelling in the interior of Portugal with several
companions . My horse had never been in that part of the country
before . We left our inn at daybreak , and proceeded through a
mountainous district to visit some beautiful scenery . On our return
evening was approaching , when I stopped behind my companions to
tighten the girths of my saddle . Believing that there was only one
path to take , I rode slowly on , but shortly reached a spot where I
was in some doubt whether I should go forward or turn off to the
left . I shouted , but heard no voice in reply , nor could I see any
trace of my friends . Darkness was coming rapidly on . My horse
seeming inclined to take the left hand , I thought it best to let
him do so . In a short time the sky became overcast , and there was
no moon . The darkness was excessive . Still my steed stepped boldly
on . So dense became the obscurity , that I could not see his ears;
nor could I , indeed , distinguish my own hand held out at
arms-length . I had no help for it but to place the reins on my
horse's neck and let him go forward . 

We had heard of robberies and murders committed; and I knew that
there were steep precipices , down which , had my horse fallen , we
should have been dashed to pieces . Still the firm way in which he
trotted gave me confidence . Hour after hour passed by . The darkness
would , at all events , conceal me from the banditti , if such were in
wait--that was one consolation; but then I could not tell where my
horse might be taking me . It might be far away from where I hoped
to find my companions . 

At length I heard a dog bark , and saw a light twinkling far down
beneath me , by which I knew that I was still on the mountain-side . 
Thus on my steady steed proceeded , till I found that he was going
along a road , and I fancied I could distinguish the outlines of
trees on either hand . Suddenly he turned on one side , when my hat
was nearly knocked off by striking against the beam of a trellised
porch , covered with vines; and to my joy I found that he had
brought me up to the door of the inn which we had left in the
morning . 

My companions , trusting to their human guide , had not arrived , 
having taken a longer though safer route . My steed had followed the
direct path over the mountains which we had pursued in the morning . 

Another horse of mine , which always appeared a gentle animal , and
which constantly carried a lady , was , during my absence , ridden by
a friend with spurs . On my return , I found that he had on several
occasions attacked his rider , when dismounted , with his fore-feet , 
and had once carried off the rim of his hat . From that time forward
he would allow no one to approach him if he saw spurs on his heels;
and I was obliged to blindfold him when mounting and dismounting , 
as he on several occasions attacked me as he had done my friend . 

A horse was shut up in a paddock near Leeds , in a corner of which
stood a pump with a tub beneath it . 

The groom , however , often forgot to fill the tub , the horse having
thus no water to drink . The animal had observed the way in which
water was procured , and one night , when the tub was empty , was seen
to take the pump handle in his mouth , and work it with his head
till he had procured as much water as he required . 

A remarkable instance of a horse saving human life occurred some
years ago at the Cape of Good Hope . A storm was raging when a
vessel , dragging her anchors , was driven on the rocks and speedily
dashed to pieces . Many of those on board perished . The remainder
were seen clinging to the wreck , or holding on to the fragments
which were washing to and fro amid the breakers . No boat could put
off . When all hope had gone of saving the unfortunate people , a
settler , somewhat advanced in life , appeared on horseback on the
shore . His horse was a bold and strong animal , and noted for
excelling as a swimmer . The farmer , moved with compassion for the
unfortunate seamen , resolved to attempt saving them . Fixing himself
firmly in the saddle , he pushed into the midst of the breakers . At
first both horse and rider disappeared; but soon they were seen
buffeting the waves , and swimming towards the wreck . Calling two of
the seamen , he told them to hold on by his boots; then turning his
horse's head , he brought them safely to land . 

No less than seven times did he repeat this dangerous exploit , thus
saving fourteen lives . For the eighth time he plunged in , when , 
encountering a formidable wave , the brave man lost his balance , and
was instantly overwhelmed . The horse swam safely to shore; but his
gallant rider , alas ! was no more . 

Some horses in the county of Limerick , which were pastured in a
field , broke bounds like a band of unruly schoolboys , and
scrambling through a gap which they had made in a fence , found
themselves in a narrow lane . Along the quiet by-road they galloped
helter-skelter , at full speed , snorting and tossing their manes in
the full enjoyment of their freedom , but greatly to the terror of a
party of children who were playing in the lane . As the horses were
seen tearing wildly along , the children scrambled up the bank into
the hedge , and buried themselves in the bushes , regardless of
thorns , --with the exception of one poor little thing , who , too
small to run , fell down on its face , and lay crying loudly in the
middle of the narrow way . 

On swept the horses; but when the leader of the troop saw the
little child lying in his path , he suddenly stopped , and so did the
others behind him . Then stooping his head , he seized the infant's
clothes with his teeth , and carefully lifted it to the side of the
road , laying it gently and quite unhurt on the tender grass . 

He and his companions then resumed their gallop in the lane , 
unconscious of having performed a remarkable act . 

We have no less an authority than Dr . Franklin to prove that
donkeys enjoy music . 

The mistress of a chateau in France where he visited had an
excellent voice , and every time she began to sing , a donkey
belonging to the establishment invariably came near the window , and
listened with the greatest attention . One day , during the
performance of a piece of music which apparently pleased it more
than any it had previously heard , the animal , quitting its usual
post outside the window , unceremoniously entered the room , and , to
exhibit its satisfaction , began to bray with all its might . 

Donkeys sometimes exert their ingenuity to their own advantage . A
certain ass had his quarters in a shed , in front of which was a
small yard . On one side of the yard was a kitchen garden , separated
from it by a wall , in which was a door fastened by two bolts and a
latch . The owner of the premises one morning , in taking a turn
round his garden , observed the footprints of an ass on the walks
and beds . "Surely some one must have left the door open at night , "
thought the master . He accordingly took care to see that it was
closed . 

Again , however , he found that the ass had visited the garden . 

The next night , curious to know how this had happened , he watched
from a window overlooking the yard . At first he kept a light
burning near him . The ass , however , remained quietly at his stall . 
After a time , to enable him to see the better , he had it removed , 
when what was his surprise to see the supposed stupid donkey come
out of the shed , go to the door , and , rearing himself on his
hind-legs , unfasten the upper bolt of the door with his nose . This
done , he next withdrew the lower bolt; then lifted the latch , and
walked into the garden . He was not long engaged in his foraging
expedition , and soon returned with a bunch of carrots in his mouth . 
Placing them in his shed , he went back and carefully closed the
door and began at his ease to munch the provender he had so
adroitly got possession of . 

The owner , suspecting that people would not believe his story , 
invited several of his neighbours to witness the performance of the
ass . Not till the light , however , had been taken away , would the
creature commence his operations , evidently conscious that he was
doing wrong . 

A lock was afterwards put on the door , which completely baffled the
ingenuity of the cunning animal . 



"OLD MUSTARD": A TALE OF THE WESTERN PIONEERS

By E . W . Frentz

When Grandmother Lane was a little girl her father came in one day
and said , "Wife , it is all settled at last . I have sold the farm . 
Next week we will start West . There is a large company going from
here , and we must try to get ready to go with them . "

Little Mary , as grandmother was then called , heard the news with
great delight , because she knew it would mean a long , long journey , 
lasting months , and carrying them into a new country , where there
was never any cold weather and where great crops could be raised
without much hard work , and there would always be plenty to eat . 
Besides , her family was not going alone , but many other families
whom they knew were going at the same time , so that she would have
some of her playmates with her all the way . 

It was a wonderful sight when the great day came at last , and the
long wagon-train set out . In all there were more than forty wagons , 
some drawn by four or six horses , and some by as many as eight big
oxen . And such strange wagons ! They were more like little houses on
wheels , only instead of a roof there was a high frame overhead made
of hoops , and covered with canvas , so it made a sort of tent to
ride in by day , if you wished , and to sleep in at night . And from
these hoops hung all sorts of things--hams and pieces of bacon , 
strips of dried pumpkin , pans to cook in , and clothes . Underneath
the big wagon , outside , swung the great kettles , in which the
larger things were cooked , and axes , and ropes and chains for
pulling the wagons out when they got stuck in the mud . 

To little Mary it was all new and delightful . The big wagons
squeaked and groaned and swayed from side to side till the hams
hanging from the frame overhead would swing back and forth like the
pendulum of a clock . There were the shouts of the men to the horses
and oxen , the barking of the dogs that ran along the side of the
trail , the sharp cracking of the drivers' whips , and the
_ting-tang_ of the iron kettles swinging against each other . 
And always they were passing through places that were new and
seeing things that were fresh and strange . 

The wagon of Mr . Harding--that was grandmother's father--was drawn
by four oxen , but of them , known as Jerry , began to show signs of
sickness when they had been on the road a few days . The men gave
him medicine and doctored him all they could , but he seemed to grow
weaker all the time instead of better , and one morning , when they
went to yoke the oxen to the wagon , they found him dead . 

For a day or two they went on with only three oxen . Then Mr . 
Harding met a trader who was willing to sell him a pet ox that he
called "Old Mustard , " to take the place of Jerry . 

It was a very funny-looking ox , indeed , not like any that Mary or
anybody in her family had ever seen before . He had a very large , 
round head , with shaggy hair matted on top , and on his back was a
large hump . In color he was a dirty yellow all over . That is why
the trader called him Mustard . 

"He isn't very pretty , " said the trader , "but he is strong and
good-natured , and will pull more than any ox of his size that I
ever saw . Besides , he will get on with less grass and less water . 
He is a half-buffalo--he shows that in his huge head and shoulders . 
For this reason he will be worth more to you than any scout or
watch-dog; he can smell Indians a mile away , and will fight them on
sight . " Mr . Harding did not quite like to buy so strange an animal , 
but he must get another ox somewhere , and so he took Old Mustard . 

By the end of the first day he was very glad he had done so , for
the funny-looking yellow creature took its place at the tongue of
the cart and pulled steadily and well . And every day after that he
did his work faithfully , and seemed never to be sick or to feel
tired . 

By the end of the fourth week the wagon-train had entered a country
where the Indians were known to be on the war-path , and trouble was
expected . They even found the remains of three partly burned
wagons . 

Great care was now taken to send scouts ahead during the day and to
prepare the camp for defense at night . 

The first thing that was done as soon as the stop was made for the
night was to "park" all the wagons , as they called it . The big
ox-carts were placed in a great circle and chained one to another . 
Sometimes the cattle were picketed outside , to graze , with men
armed with guns to watch them , and sometimes they were driven
inside . But always the camp-fires were built in the circle , and
round them the different families gathered to cook and eat their
supper . 

One night , when the wagons had been parked and every one had eaten
supper and gone to sleep , Old Mustard began to act very strangely . 
At first he tossed his head and blew hard through his nostrils;
then he began to move about uneasily as far as his rope would let
him , and to snort and paw the ground . 

When one of the guards went near him he turned upon him a pair of
eyes that were bright green and shiny . At last Mr . Harding happened
to think what the trader had told him . 

"Do you suppose it can be that he scents Indians ? " he asked one of
the other men . 

"It may be , " he said . "It is sure that he is excited over
something . Perhaps we had better be on the safe side and wake the
men . "

Quietly Mr . Harding went from wagon to wagon , rousing the sleepers . 
He had hardly finished when Old Mustard , with a terrible roar , 
snapped the rope that held him , dashed to the edge of the circle , 
leaped a cart-tongue , and thundered away into the darkness . Almost
instantly there came a scream and then the rushing charge of Indian
riders . 

They were met by the men of the party , now all prepared for them
and protected by the circle of wagons . And finding that their
attack had been discovered too soon , the Indians drew off after the
first rush . 

By the earliest flush of daylight a searching-party went out from
camp . It came upon poor Old Mustard grazing about , and not far away
lay an Indian trampled into the dust . The Indian was the foremost
of the band that was quietly creeping up on the camp when Old
Mustard had scented them , and not only given warning , but surprised
and killed the leader . 



CARLO , THE SOLDIERS' DOG

By General Rush C . Hawkins

The Ninth New York Volunteers was organized in April , 1861 , in the
City of New York . Two of the companies were made up of men from
outside the city . C was composed of men from Hoboken and Paterson , 
New Jersey , and G marched into the regimental headquarters fully
organized from the town of Fort Lee in that State . With this last
named company came Carlo , the subject of this sketch . 

When he joined the regiment , he had passed beyond the period of
puppyhood and was in the full flush of dogly beauty . He was large , 
not very large , --would probably have turned the scales at about
fifty pounds . His build was decidedly "stocky , " and , as horsey men
would say , his feet were well under him; his chest was broad and
full , back straight , color a warm dark brindle , nose and lips very
black , while he had a broad , full forehead and a wonderful pair of
large , round , soft , dark-brown eyes . Add to this description an air
of supreme , well-bred dignity , and you have an idea of one of the
noblest animals that ever lived . 

His origin was obscure; one camp reunion asserted that he was born
on board of a merchant ship while his mother was making a passage
from Calcutta to New York; and another told of a beautiful mastiff
living somewhere in the State of New Jersey that had the honor of
bringing him into the world . It would be very interesting to know
something of the parentage of our hero , but since the facts
surrounding his birth are unattainable , we must content ourselves
with telling a portion of a simple story of a good and noble life . 
It may be safe to assert that he was not a native American; if he
had been , he would have provided himself with the regulation
genealogical tree and family coat-of-arms . 

During the first part of his term of service , Carlo was very loyal
to his company , marched , messed , and slept with it; but he was not
above picking up , here and there , from the mess tents of the other
companies a tid-bit , now and then , which proved acceptable to a
well-appointed digestion . 

His first turn on guard was performed as a member of the detail
from Co . G , and always afterward , in the performance of that duty , 
he was most faithful . No matter who else might be late , he was ever
on time when the call for guard mount was sounded , ready to go out
with his own particular squad . At first , he would march back to
company quarters with the old detail , but , as soon as he came to
realize the value and importance of guard duty , he made up his mind
that his place was at the guard tent and on the patrol beat , where
he could be of the greatest service in watching the movements of
the enemy . 

In the performance of his duties as a member of the guard he was
very conscientious and ever on the alert . No stray pig , wandering
sheep , or silly calf could pass in front of his part of the line
without being investigated by him . It is possible that his
vigilance in investigating intruding meats was sharpened by the
hope of substantial recognition in the way of a stray rib extracted
from the marauding offender whose ignorance of army customs in time
of war had brought it too near our lines . 

As a rule , Carlo , what with his guard duties and other purely
routine items , managed to dispose of the day until dress parade . At
that time he appeared at his best , and became the regimental dog . 

No officer or soldier connected with the command more fully
appreciated "The pomp and circumstance of great and glorious war"
than he . As the band marched out to take position previous to
playing for the companies to assemble , he would place himself
alongside the drum-major , and , when the signal for marching was
given , would move off with stately and solemn tread , with head well
up , looking straight to the front . Upon those great occasions , he
fully realized the dignity of his position , and woe betide any
unhappy other dog that happened to get in front of the marching
band . When upon the parade field , he became , next to the colonel , 
the commanding officer , and ever regarded himself as the regulator
of the conduct of those careless and frivolous dogs , that go
about the world like street urchins , having no character for
respectability or position in society to sustain . 

Of those careless ne'er-do-wells the company had accumulated a very
large following . As a rule , they were harmless and companionable , 
and were always on hand ready for a free lunch . It was only on
dress parade that they made themselves over-officious . Each company
was attended to the parade ground by its particular family of
canine companions , and , when all of them had assembled , the second
battalion of the regiment would make itself known by a great
variety of jumpings , caperings , barks of joy , and cries of delight . 
To this unseasonable hilarity Carlo seriously objected , and his
actions plainly told the story of his disgust at the conduct of the
silly members of his race . He usually remained a passive observer
until the exercise in the manual of arms , at which particular
period in the ceremonies , the caperings and the barkings would
become quite unendurable . Our hero would then assume the character
of a preserver of the peace . He would make for the nearest group of
revellers , and , in as many seconds , give a half dozen or more of
them vigorous shakes , which would set them to howling , and warn the
others of the thoughtless tribe of an impending danger . Immediately
the offenders would all scamper to another part of the field , and
remain quiet until the dress parade was over . This duty was
self-imposed and faithfully performed upon many occasions . 

After the parade was dismissed Carlo would march back to quarters
with his own company , where he would remain until the last daily
distributions of rations , whereupon , after having disposed of his
share , he would start out upon a tour of regimental inspection , 
making friendly calls at various company quarters and by taps
turning up at the headquarters of the guard . His duties ended for
the day , he would enjoy his well-earned rest until reveille , unless
some event of an unusual nature , occurring during the night , 
disturbed his repose and demanded his attention . 

During the first year of his service in the field , Carlo was very
fortunate . He had shared in all the transportations by water , in
all the marchings , skirmishes , and battles , without receiving a
scratch or having a day's illness . But his good fortune was soon to
end , for it was ordained that , like other brave defenders , he was
to suffer in the great cause for which all were risking their
lives . 

The morning of April 18 , 1862 , my brigade , then stationed at
Roanoke Island , embarked upon the steamer _Ocean Wave_ for an
expedition up the Elizabeth River , the object of which was to
destroy the locks of the Dismal Swamp canal in order to prevent
several imaginary iron-clads from getting into Albemarle Sound . 

Among the first to embark was the ever ready and faithful Carlo , 
and the next morning , when his companions disembarked near
Elizabeth City , he was one of the first to land , and , during the
whole of the long and dreary march of thirty miles to Camden Court
House , lasting from three o'clock in the morning until one in the
afternoon , he was ever on the alert , but keeping close to his
regiment . The field of battle was reached; the engagement , in which
his command met with a great loss , commenced and ended , and , when
the particulars of the disaster were inventoried , it was
ascertained that a Confederate bullet had taken the rudimentary
claw from Carlo's left fore-leg . This was his first wound , and he
bore it like a hero without a whine or even a limp . A private of
Co . G , who first noticed the wound , exclaimed: "Ah , Carlo , what a
pity you are not an officer ! If you were , the loss of that claw
would give you sixty days' leave and a brigadier general's
commission at the end of it . " That was about the time that
generals' commissions had become very plentiful in the Department
of North Carolina . 

The command re-embarked , and reached Roanoke Island the morning
after the engagement , in time for the regulation "Hospital or Sick
Call , " which that day brought together an unusual number of
patients , and among them Carlo , who was asked to join the waiting
line by one of the wounded men . When his turn came to be inspected
by the attending surgeon , he was told to hold up the wounded leg , 
which he readily did , and then followed the washing , the
application of simple cerate , and the bandaging , with a
considerable show of interest and probable satisfaction . 

Thereafter , there was no occasion to ask him to attend the
surgeon's inspection . Each morning , as soon as the bugle call was
sounded , he would take his place in line with the other patients , 
advance in his turn , and receive the usual treatment . This habit
continued until the wound was healed . 

Always , after this , to every friendly greeting , he would respond by
holding up the wounded leg for inspection , and he acted as though
he thought that everybody was interested in the honorable scar that
told the story of patriotic duty faithfully performed . 

Later on , for some reason known to himself , Carlo transferred his
special allegiance to Co . K . and maintained close connection with
that company until the end of his term of service . He was regarded
by its members as a member of the company mess , and was treated as
one of them . But , notwithstanding his special attachments , there
can be no reasonable doubt about his having considered himself a
member of the regiment , clothed with certain powers and
responsibilities . At the end of his term he was fitted with a
uniform--trousers , jacket , and fez , and , thus dressed , he marched
up Broadway , immediately behind the band . He was soon after
mustered out of the service , and received an honorable discharge , 
not signed with written characters , but attested by the good-will
of every member of the regiment . 



A BRAVE DOG

By Sir Samuel W . Baker

When I was a boy , my grandfather frequently told a story concerning
a dog which he knew , as a more than ordinary example of the
fidelity so frequently exhibited by the race . This animal was a
mastiff that belonged to an intimate friend , to whom it was a
constant companion . It was an enormous specimen of that well-known
breed , which is not generally celebrated for any peculiar
intelligence , but is chiefly remarkable for size and strength . This
dog had been brought up by its master from puppyhood , and as the
proprietor was a single man , there had been no division of
affection , as there would have been had the dog belonged to a
family of several members . Turk regarded nobody but his owner . ( I
shall now honour Turk by the masculine gender . ) 

Whenever Mr . Prideaux went out for a walk , Turk was sure to be near
his heels . Street dogs would bark and snarl at the giant as his
massive form attracted their attention , but Turk seldom
condescended to notice such vulgar demonstrations; he was a
noble-looking creature , somewhat resembling a small lioness; but
although he was gentle and quiet in disposition , he had upon
several occasions been provoked beyond endurance , and his attack
had been nearly always fatal to his assailants . He slept at night
outside his master's door , and no sentry could be more alert upon
his watch than the faithful dog , who had apparently only one
ambition--to protect , and to accompany his owner . 

Mr . Prideaux had a dinner-party . He never invited ladies , but
simply entertained his friends as a bachelor; his dinners were but
secondary to the quality of his guests , however , who were always
men of reputation either in the literary world , or in the modern
annals of society . The dog Turk was invariably present , and usually
stretched his huge form upon the hearth-rug . 

It was a cold night in winter , when Mr . Prideaux's friends were
talking after dinner , that the conversation turned upon the subject
of dogs . Almost every person had an anecdote to relate , and my own
grandfather being present , had no doubt added his mite to the
collection , when Turk suddenly awoke from a sound sleep , and having
stretched himself until he appeared to be awake to the situation , 
walked up to his master's side , and rested his large head upon the
table . 

"Ha ha , Turk ! " exclaimed Mr . Prideaux , "you must have heard our
arguments about the dogs , so you have put in an appearance . "

"And a magnificent specimen he is ! " remarked my grandfather; "but
although a mastiff is the largest and most imposing of the race , I
do not think it is as sensible as many others . "

"As a rule you are right , " replied his master , "because they are
generally chained up as watch-dogs , and have not the intimate
association with human beings which is so great an advantage to
house-dogs; but Turk has been my constant companion from the first
month of his existence , and his intelligence is very remarkable . He
understands most things that I say , if they are connected with
himself; he will often lie upon the rug with his large eyes fixed
upon me as though searching my inward thoughts , and he will
frequently be aware instinctively that I wish to go out; upon such
times he will fetch my hat , cane , or gloves , whichever may be at
hand , and wait for me at the front door . He will take a letter or
any other token to several houses of my acquaintance , and wait for
a reply; and he can perform a variety of actions that would imply a
share of reason seldom possessed by other dogs . "

A smile of incredulity upon several faces was at once perceived by
Mr . Prideaux , who immediately took a guinea from his pocket , and
addressed his dog . "Here , Turk ! they won't believe in you ! . . . take
this guinea to No . -- , --Street , to Mr . -- , and bring me a receipt . "

The dog wagged his huge tail with evident pleasure , and the guinea
having been placed in his mouth , he hastened towards the door; this
being opened , he was admitted through the front entrance to the
street . It was a miserable night; the wind was blowing the sleet
and rain against the windows; the gutters were running with muddy
water , and the weather was exactly that which is expressed by the
common term , "not fit to turn a dog out in;" nevertheless , Turk had
started upon his mission in the howling gale and darkness , while
the front door was once more closed against the blast . 

The party were comfortably seated around the fire , and much
interested in the success or failure of the dog's adventure . 

"How long will it be before we may expect Turk's return ? " inquired
an incredulous guest . 

"The house to which I have sent him is about a mile and a half
distant , therefore if there is no delay when he barks for admission
at the door , and my friend is not absent from home , he should
return in about three-quarters of an hour with an acknowledgment . 
If , on the other hand , he cannot gain admission , he may wait for
any length of time , " replied his master . 

Bets were exchanged among the company--some supported the dog's
chances of success , while others were against him . 

The evening wore away; the allotted time was exceeded , and a whole
hour had passed , but no dog had returned . Fresh bets were made , but
the odds were against the dog . His master was still hopeful . . . . 
"I must tell you , " said Mr . Prideaux , "that Turk frequently
carries notes for me , and as he knows the house well , he certainly
will not make a mistake; perhaps my friend may be dining out , 
in which case Turk will probably wait for a longer time" . . . . 
Two hours passed . . . the storm was raging . Mr . Prideaux
himself went to the front door , which flew open before a fierce
gust the instant that the lock was turned . The clouds were
rushing past a moon but faintly visible at short intervals , 
and the gutters were clogged with masses of half-melted snow . 
"Poor Turk ! " muttered his master , "this is indeed a wretched night
for you . . . . Perhaps they have kept you in the warm kitchen , 
and will not allow you to return in such fearful weather . "

When Mr . Prideaux returned to his guests he could not conceal his
disappointment . "Ha ! " exclaimed one who had betted against the dog , 
"I never doubted his sagacity . With a guinea in his mouth , he has
probably gone into some house of entertainment where dogs are
supplied with dinner and a warm bed , instead of shivering in a
winter's gale ! "

Jokes were made by the winners of bets at the absent dog's expense , 
but his master was anxious and annoyed . The various bets were paid
by the losers , and poor Turk's reputation had suffered severely . . . . 
It was long past midnight: the guests were departed , the storm
was raging , and violent gusts occasionally shook the house . . . . 
Mr . Prideaux was alone in his study , and he poked the fire until it
blazed and roared up the chimney . . . . 

"What can have become of that dog ? " exclaimed his master to himself , 
now really anxious; "I hope they kept him; . . . most likely they
would not send him back upon such a dreadful night . "

Mr . Prideaux's study was close to the front door , and his acute
attention was suddenly directed to a violent shaking and
scratching , accompanied by a prolonged whine . In an instant he ran
into the hall , and unlocked the entrance door . . . . A mass of
filth and mud entered . . . . This was Turk ! 

The dog seemed dreadfully fatigued , and was shivering with wet and
cold . His usually clean coat was thick with mire , as though he had
been dragged through deep mud . He wagged his tail when he heard his
master's voice , but appeared dejected and ill . 

Mr . Prideaux had rung the bell , and the servants , who were equally
interested as their master in Turk's failure to perform his
mission , had attended the summons . The dog was taken downstairs , 
and immediately placed in a large tub of hot water , in which he was
accustomed to be bathed . It was now discovered that in addition to
mud and dirt , which almost concealed his coat , he was besmeared
with blood ! 

Mr . Prideaux himself sponged his favourite with hot soap and water , 
and , to his astonishment , he perceived wounds of a serious nature:
the dog's throat was badly torn , his back and breast were deeply
bitten , and there could be no doubt that he had been worried by a
pack of dogs . This was a strange occurrence , that Turk should be
discomfited ! 

He was now washed clean , and was being rubbed dry with a thick
towel while he stood upon a blanket before the kitchen fire . . . . 
"Why , Turk , old boy , what has been the matter ? Tell us all about
it , poor old man ! " exclaimed his master . 

The dog was now thoroughly warmed , and he panted with the heat of
the kitchen fire; he opened his mouth , . . . _and the guinea which
he had received in trust dropped on the kitchen floor_ ! . . . 

"There is some mystery in this , " said Mr . Prideaux , "which I
will endeavour to discover to-morrow . . . . He has been set upon by
strange dogs , and rather than lose the guinea , he has allowed
himself to be half killed without once opening his mouth in
self-defence ! Poor Turk ! " continued his master , "you must have lost
your way , old man , in the darkness and storm; most likely confused
after the unequal fight . What an example you have given us wretched
humans in being steadfast to a trust ! "

Turk was wonderfully better after his warm bath . He lapped up a
large bowl of good thick soup mixed with bread , and in half an hour
was comfortably asleep upon his thick rug by his master's bedroom
door . . . . 

Upon the following morning the storm had cleared away , and a
bright sky had succeeded to the gloom of the preceding night . 

Immediately after breakfast , Mr . Prideaux , accompanied by his dog
 ( who was , although rather stiff , not much the worse for the rough
treatment he had received ) , started for a walk towards the house to
which he had directed Turk upon the previous evening . He was
anxious to discover whether his friend had been absent , as he
concluded that the dog might have been waiting for admittance , and
had been perhaps attacked by some dogs belonging to the house , or
its neighbours' . 

The master and Turk had walked for nearly a mile , and had just
turned the corner of a street when , as they passed a butcher's shop
upon the right hand , a large brindled mastiff rushed from the
shop-door , and flew at Turk with unprovoked ferocity . 

"Call your dog off ! " shouted Mr . Prideaux to the butcher , who
surveyed the attack with impudent satisfaction . . . . "Call him
off , or my dog will kill him ! " continued Mr . Prideaux . 

The usually docile Turk had rushed to meet his assailant with a
fury that was extraordinary . With a growl like that of a lion , he
quickly seized his antagonist by the throat; rearing upon his hind
legs , he exerted his tremendous strength , and in a fierce struggle
of only a few seconds , he threw the brindled dog upon its back . It
was in vain that Mr . Prideaux endeavoured to call him off , the rage
of his favourite was quite ungovernable; he never for an instant
relaxed his hold , but with the strength of a wild beast of prey , 
Turk shook the head of the butcher's dog to the right and left
until it struck each time heavily against the pavement . . . The
butcher attempted to interfere , and lashed him with a huge whip . 

"Stand clear ! fair play ! don't you strike my dog ! " shouted Mr . 
Prideaux . "Your dog was the first to attack ! "

In reply to the whip , Turk had redoubled his fury , and , without
relinquishing his hold , he had now dragged the butcher's dog off
the pavement , and occasionally shaking the body as he pulled the
unresisting mass along the gutter , he drew it into the middle of
the street . 

A large crowd had collected , which completely stopped the
thoroughfare . There were no police in those days , but only
watchmen , who were few and far between; even had they been present , 
it is probable they would have joined in the amusement of a
dog-fight , which in that age of brutality was considered to be
sport . . . . 

"Fair play ! " shouted the bystanders . . . . "Let 'em have it out ! "
cried others , as they formed a circle around the dogs . . . . In
the meantime , Mr . Prideaux had seized Turk by his collar , while the
butcher was endeavouring to release the remains of his dog from the
infuriated and deadly grip . . . . 

At length Mr . Prideaux's voice and action appeared for a moment
to create a calm , and , snatching the opportunity , he , with the
assistance of a person in the crowd , held back his dog , as the
carcass of the butcher's dog was dragged away by the lately
insolent owner . . . . The dog was dead ! 

Turk's flanks were heaving with the intense exertion and excitement
of the fight , and he strained to escape from his master's hold to
once more attack the lifeless body of his late antagonist . . . . 
At length , by kind words and the caress of the well-known hand , his
fury was calmed down . . . . 

"Well , that's the most curious adventure I've ever had with a dog ! "
exclaimed the butcher , who was now completely crestfallen . . . . 
"Why , that's the very dog ! he is so--that's the very dog who came
by my shop late last night in the howling storm , and my dog Tiger
went at him and towzled him up completely . I never saw such a
cowardly cur; he wouldn't show any fight , although he was pretty
near as big as a costermonger's donkey; and there my dog Tiger
nearly eat half of him , and dragged the other half about the
gutter , till he looked more like an old door-mat than a dog; and I
thought he must have killed him . . . and here he comes out as fresh
as paint to-day , and kills old Tiger clean off as though he'd been
only a biggish cat ! "

"What do you say ? " asked Mr . Prideaux . . . "Was it your dog that
worried my poor dog last night , when he was upon a message of
trust ? . . . My friend , I thank you for this communication , but let
me inform you of the fact that my dog had _a guinea in his
mouth_ to carry to my friend , and rather than drop it he allowed
himself to be half killed by your savage Tiger . To-day he has
proved his courage , and your dog has discovered his mistake . This
is the guinea that he dropped from his mouth when he returned to me
after midnight , beaten and distressed ! " said Mr . Prideaux , much
excited . "Here , Turk , old boy , take the guinea again , and come
along with me ! you have had your revenge , and have given us all a
lesson . " His master gave him the guinea in his mouth , and they
continued their walk . . . . It appeared , upon Mr . Prideaux's
arrival at his friend's house , that Turk had never been there;
probably after his defeat he had become so confused that he lost
his way in the heavy storm , and had at length regained the road
home some time after midnight , in the deplorable condition already
described . 



UNCLE DICK'S ROLF

By Georgiana M . Craik

"I had been riding for five or six miles one pleasant afternoon . It
was a delicious afternoon , like the afternoon of an English summer
day . You always imagine it hotter out in Africa by a good deal than
it is in England , don't you ? Well , so it is , in a general way , a
vast deal hotter; but every now and then , after the rains have
fallen and the wind comes blowing from the sea , we get a day as
much like one of our own best summer days as you ever felt
anywhere . This afternoon was just like an English summer afternoon , 
with the fresh sweet breeze rustling amongst the green leaves , and
the great bright sea stretching out all blue and golden , and
meeting the blue sky miles and miles away . 

"It wasn't very hot , but it was just hot enough to make the thought
of a swim delicious; so after I had been riding leisurely along for
some little time , shooting a bird or two as I went , --for I wanted
some bright feathers to send home to a little cousin that I had in
England , --I alighted from my horse , and , letting him loose to
graze , lay down for a quarter of an hour to cool myself , and then
began to make ready for my plunge . 

"I was standing on a little ledge of cliff , some six or seven feet
above the sea . It was high tide , and the water at my feet was about
a fathom deep . 'I shall have a delightful swim , ' thought to myself , 
as I threw off my coat; and as just at that moment Rolf in a very
excited way flung himself upon me , evidently understanding the
meaning of the proceeding , and , as I thought , anxious to show his
sympathy with it , I repeated the remark aloud . 'Yes , we'll have a
delightful swim , you and I together , ' I said . 'A grand swim , my old
lad'; and I clapped his back as I spoke , and encouraged him , as I
was in the habit of doing , to express his feelings without reserve . 
But , rather to my surprise , instead of wagging his tail , and
wrinkling his nose , and performing any of his usual antics , the
creature only lifted up his face and began to whine . He had lain , 
for the quarter of an hour while I had been resting , at the edge of
the little cliff , with his head dropped over it; but whether he had
been taking a sleep in that position , or had been amusing himself
by watching the waves , was more than I knew . He was a capital one
for sleeping even then , and generally made a point of snatching a
doze at every convenient opportunity; so I had naturally troubled
my head very little about him , taking it for granted that he was at
his usual occupation . But , whether he had been asleep before or
not , at any rate he was wide awake now , and , as it seemed to me , in
a very odd humor indeed . 

"'What's the matter , old fellow ? ' I said to him , when he set up
this dismal howl . 'Don't you want to have a swim ? Well , you needn't
unless you like , only _I_ mean to have one; so down with you , 
and let me get my clothes off . ' But , instead of getting down , the
creature began to conduct himself in the most incomprehensible way , 
first seizing me by the trousers with his teeth and pulling me to
the edge of the rock , as if he wanted me to plunge in dressed as I
was; then catching me again and dragging me back , much as though I
was a big rat that he was trying to worry; and this pantomime , I
declare , he went through three separate times , barking and whining
all the while , till I began to think he was going out of his mind . 

"Well , God forgive me ! but at last I got into a passion with the
beast . I couldn't conceive what he meant . For two or three minutes
I tried to pacify him , and as long as I took no more steps to get
my clothes off he was willing to be pacified; but the instant I
fell to undressing myself again he was on me once more , pulling me
this way and that , hanging on my arms , slobbering over me , howling
with his mouth up in the air . And so at last I lost my temper , and
I snatched up my gun and struck him with the butt-end of it . My
poor Rolf ! " said Uncle Pick , all at once , with a falter in his
voice; and he stopped abruptly , and stooped down and laid his hand
on the great black head . 

"He was quieter after I had struck him , " said Uncle Dick , after a
little pause . "For a few moments he lay quite still at my feet , and
I had begun to think that his crazy fit was over , and that he was
going to give me no more trouble , when all at once , just as I had
got ready to jump into the water , the creature sprang to his feet
and flung himself upon me again . He threw himself with all his
might upon my breast and drove me backwards , howling So wildly that
many a time since , boys , I have thought I must have been no better
than a blind , perverse fool , not to have guessed what the trouble
was; but the fact is , I was a conceited young fellow ( as most young
fellows are ) , and because I imagined the poor beast was trying for
some reason of his own to get his own way , I thought it was my
business to teach him that he was not to get his own way , but that
I was to get mine; and so I beat him down somehow , --I don't like to
think of it now; I struck him again three or four times with the
end of my gun , till at last I got myself freed from him . 

"He gave a cry when he fell back . I call it a cry , for it was more
like something human than a dog's howl , --something so wild and
pathetic that , angry as I was , it startled me , and I almost think , 
if time enough had been given me , I would have made some last
attempt then to understand what the creature meant; but I had no
time after that . I was standing a few feet in from the water , and
as soon as I had shaken him off he went to the edge of the bit of
cliff , and stood there for a moment till I came up to him , and
then--just as in another second I should have jumped into the
sea--my brave dog , my noble dog , gave one last whine and one look
into my face , and took the leap before me . And then , boys , in
another instant I saw what he had meant . He had scarcely touched
the water when I saw a crocodile slip like lightning from a sunny
ledge of the cliff , and grip him by the hinder legs . 

"You know that I had my gun close at hand , and in the whole course
of my life I never was so glad to have my gun beside me . It was
loaded , too , and a revolver . I caught it up , and fired into the
water . I fired three times , and two of the shots went into the
brute's head . One missed him , and the first seemed not to harm him
much , but the third hit him in some vital place , I hope , --some
sensitive place , at any rate , for the hideous jaws started wide . 
Then , with my gun in my hand still , I began with all my might to
shout out , 'Rolf ! " I couldn't leave my post , for the brute , though
he had let Rolf go , and had dived for a moment , might make another
spring , and I didn't dare to take my eyes off the spot where he had
gone down; but I called to my wounded beast with all my might , and
when he had struggled through the water and gained a moment's hold
of the rock , I jumped down and caught him , and somehow--I don't
know how--half carried and half dragged him up the little bit of
steep ascent , till we were safe on the top , --on the dry land again . 
And then upon my word , I don't know what I did next , only I think , 
as I looked at my darling's poor crushed limbs , with the blood
oozing from them , and heard his choking gasps for breath--I--I
forgot for a moment or two that I was a man at all , and burst out
crying like a child . 

"Boys , you don't know what it is to feel that a living creature has
tried to give up his life for you , even though the creature is only
a soulless dog . Do you think I had another friend in the world who
would have done what Rolf had done for me ? If I had , I did not know
it . And then when I thought that it was while he had been trying to
save my life that I had taken up my gun and struck him ! There are
some things , my lads , that a man does without meaning any harm by
them , which yet , when he sees them by the light of after events , he
can never bear to look back upon without a sort of agony; and those
blows I gave to Rolf are of that sort . _He_ forgave them , --my
noble dog; but I have never forgiven myself for them to this hour . 
When I saw him lying before me , with his blood trickling out upon
the sand , I think I would have given my right hand to save his
life . And well I might , too , for he had done ten times more than
that to save mine . 

"He licked the tears off my cheeks , my poor old fellow; I remember
that . We looked a strange pair , I dare say , as we lay on the ground
together , with our heads side by side . It's a noble old head still , 
isn't it , boys ? ( I don't mean mine , but this big one down here . All
right , Rolf ! We're only talking of your beauty , my lad . ) It's as
grand a head as ever a dog had . I had his picture taken after I
came home . I've had him painted more than once , but somehow I don't
think the painters have ever seen quite into the bottom of his
heart . At least , I fancy that if I were a painter I could make
something better of him than any of them have done yet . Perhaps
it's only a notion of mine , but , to tell the truth , I've only a
dozen times or so in my life seen a painting of a grand dog that
looks quite right . But I'm wandering from my story , though , indeed , 
my story is almost at an end . 

"When I had come to my senses a little , I had to try to get my poor
Rolf moved . We were a long way from any house , and the creature
couldn't walk a step . I tore up my shirt , and bound his wounds as
well as I could , and then I got my clothes on , and called to my
horse , and in some way , as gently as I could , --though it was no
easy thing to do it , --I got him and myself together upon the
horse's back , and we began our ride . There was a village about four
or five miles off , and I made for that . It was a long , hard jolt
for a poor fellow with both his hindlegs broken , but he bore it as
patiently as if he had been a Christian . I never spoke to him but , 
panting as he was , he was ready to lick my hands and look lovingly
up into my face . I've wondered since , many a time , what he could
have thought about it all; and the only thing I am sure of is that
he never thought much of the thing that he himself had done . That
seemed , I know , all natural and simple to him; I don't believe that
he has ever understood to this day what anybody wondered at in it , 
or made a hero of him for . For the noblest people are the people
who are noble without knowing it; and the same rule , I fancy , holds
good , too , for dogs . 

"I got him to a resting-place at last , after a weary ride , and then
I had his wounds dressed; but it was weeks before he could stand
upon his feet again , and when at last he began to walk he limped , 
and he has gone on limping ever since . The bone of one leg was so
crushed that it couldn't be set properly , and so that limb is
shorter than the other three . _He_ doesn't mind it much , I
dare say , --I don't think he ever did , --but it has been a pathetic
lameness to me , boys . It's all an old story now , you know , " said
Uncle Dick , abruptly , "but it's one of those things that a man
doesn't forget , and that it would be a shame to him if he ever
_could_ forget as long as his life lasts . "

Uncle Dick stooped down again as he ceased to speak , and Rolf , 
disturbed by the silence , raised his head to look about him . As his
master had said , it was a grand old head still , though the eyes
were growing dim now with age . Uncle Dick laid his hand upon it , 
and the bushy tail began to wag . It had wagged at the touch of that
hand for many a long day . 

"We've been together for fifteen years . He's getting old now , " said
Uncle Dick . 



SCRAP

By Lucia Chamberlain

At the gray end of the afternoon the regiment of twelve companies
went through Monterey on its way to the summer camp , a mile out on
the salt-meadows; and it was here that Scrap joined it . 

He did not tag at the heels of the boys who tagged the last
company , or rush out with the other dogs who barked at the band;
but he appeared somehow independent of any surroundings , and
marched , ears alert , stump tail erect , one foot in front of the
tall first lieutenant who walked on the wing of Company A . 

The lieutenant was self-conscious and so fresh to the service that
his shoulder-straps hurt him . He failed to see Scrap , who was very
small and very yellow , until , in quickening step , he stumbled over
him and all but measured his long length . He aimed an accurate kick
that sent Scrap flying , surprised but not vindictive , to the side
lines , where he considered , his head cocked . With the scratched ear
pricked and the bitten ear flat , he passed the regiment in review
until Company K , with old Muldoon , sergeant on the flank , came by . 

As lean , as mongrel , as tough , and as scarred as Scrap , he carried
his wiry body with a devil-may-care assurance , in which Scrap may
have recognized a kindred spirit . He decided in a flash . He made a
dart and fell in abreast the sergeant of Company K . Muldoon saw and
growled at him . 

"Gr-r-r-r ! " said Scrap , not ill-naturedly , and fell back a pace . 
But he did not slink . He had the secret of success . He kept as
close as he could and yet escape Muldoon's boot . With his head
high , ears stiff , tail up , he stepped out to the music . 

Muldoon looked back with a threat that sent Scrap retreating , heels
over ears . The sergeant was satisfied that the dog had gone; but
when camp was reached and ranks were broken he found himself
confronted by a disreputable yellow cur with a ragged ear cocked
over his nose . 

"Well , I'm domned ! " said Muldoon . His heart , probably the toughest
thing about him , was touched by this fearless persistence . 

"Ar-ren't ye afraid o' nothin' , ye little scrap ? " he said . Scrap , 
answering the first name he had ever known , barked shrilly . 

"What's that dog doing here ? " said the tall lieutenant of Company
A , disapprovingly . 

"I'm afther kickin' him out , sor , " explained Muldoon , and , upon the
lieutenant's departure , was seen retreating in the direction of the
cook-tent , with the meager and expectant Scrap inconspicuously at
his heels . 

He went to sleep at taps in Muldoon's tent , curled up inside
Muldoon's cartridge-belt; but at reveille the next morning the
sergeant missed him . Between drill and drill Muldoon sought
diligently , with insinuations as to the character of dog-stealers
that were near to precipitating personal conflict . He found the
stray finally , in Company B street , leaping for bones amid the
applause of the habitants . 

Arraigned collectively as thieves , Company B declared that the dog
had strayed in and remained only because he could not be kicked
out . But their pride in the height of his leaps was too evidently
the pride of possession; and Muldoon , after vain attempts to catch
the excited Scrap , who was eager only for bones , retired with
threats of some vague disaster to befall Company B the next day if
_his_ dog were not returned . 

The responsibility , with its consequences , was taken out of Company
B's hands by Scrap's departure from their lines immediately after
supper . He was not seen to go . He slid away silently , among the
broken shadows of the tents . Company B reviled Muldoon . Scrap spent
the night in a bugler's cape , among a wilderness of brasses , and
reappeared the next morning at guard mount , deftly following the
stately maneuvers of the band . 

"Talk about a dorg's gratitude ! " said the sergeant of Company B , 
bitterly , remembering Scrap's entertainment of the previous
evening . 

"I'm on to his game ! " muttered old Muldoon . "Don't ye see , ye
fool , he don't belong to any _wan_ of us . He belongs to the
crowd--to the regiment . That's what he's tryin' to show us . He's
what that Frinchman down in F calls a--a mascot; and , be jabers , he
moves like a soldier ! "

The regiment's enthusiasm for Scrap , as voiced by Muldoon , 
was not extended to the commanding officer , who felt that the
impressiveness of guard mount was detracted from by Scrap's
deployments . Also the tall lieutenant of Company A disliked the
sensation of being accompanied in his social excursions among
ladies who had driven out to band practise by a lawless yellow pup
with a bitten ear . The lieutenant , good fellow at bottom , was yet a
bit of a snob , and he would have preferred the colonel's foolish
Newfoundland to the spirited but unregenerate Scrap . 

But the privates and "non-coms" judged by the spirit , and bid for
the favor of their favorite , and lost money at canteen on the next
company to be distinguished as Scrap's temporary entertainers . He
was cordial , even demonstrative , but royally impartial , devoting a
day to a company with a method that was military . He had personal
friends , --Muldoon for one , the cook for another , --but there was no
man in the regiment who could expect Scrap to run to his whistle . 

Yet independent as he was of individuals , he obeyed regimental
regulations like a soldier . He learned the guns and the bugles , 
what actions were signified by certain sounds . He was up in the
morning with the roll of the drums . He was with every drill that
was informal enough not to require the presence of the commanding
officer , and during dress parade languished , lamenting , in
Muldoon's tent . Barking furiously , he was the most enthusiastic
spectator of target practise . He learned to find the straying balls
when the regimental nine practised during "release , " and betrayed a
frantic desire to "retrieve" the shot that went crashing seaward
from the sullen-mouthed cannon on the shore . More than once he made
one of the company that crossed the lines at an unlawful hour to
spend a night among the crooked ways of Monterey . 

The regiment was tiresome with tales of his tricks . The height of
his highest leap was registered in the mess , and the number of rats
that had died in his teeth were an ever increasing score in the
canteen . He was fairly aquiver with the mere excitement and
curiosity of living . There was no spot in the camp too secure or
too sacred for Scrap to penetrate . His invasions were without
impertinence; but the regiment was his , and he deposited dead rats
in the lieutenant's shoes as casually as he concealed bones in the
French horn; and slumbered in the major's hat-box with the same
equanimity with which he slept in Muldoon's jacket . 

The major evicted Scrap violently , but , being a good-natured man , 
said nothing to the colonel , who was not . But it happened , only a
day after the episode of the hat-box , that the colonel entered his
quarters to find the yellow mascot , fresh from a plunge in the surf
and a roll in the dirt , reposing on his overcoat . 

To say that the colonel was angry would be weak; but , overwhelmed
as he was , he managed to find words and deeds . Scrap fled with a
sharp yelp as a boot-tree caught him just above the tail . 

His exit did not fail to attract attention in the company street . 
The men were uneasy , for the colonel was noticeably a man of action
as well as of temper . Their premonitions were fulfilled when at
assembly the next morning , an official announcement was read to the
attentive regiment . The colonel , who was a strategist as well as a
fighter , had considered the matter more calmly overnight . He was
annoyed by the multiplicity of Scrap's appearances at times and
places where he was officially a nuisance . He was more than annoyed
by the local paper's recent reference to "our crack yellow-dog
regiment . " But he knew the strength of regimental sentiment
concerning Scrap and the military superstition of the mascot , and
he did not want to harrow the feelings of the "summer camp" by
detailing a firing squad . Therefore he left a loop-hole for Scrap's
escape alive . The announcement read: "All dogs found in camp not
wearing collars will be shot , by order of the commanding officer . "

Now there were but two dogs in camp , and the colonel's wore a
collar . The regiment heard the order with consternation . 

"That'll fix it , " said the colonel , comfortably . 

"Suppose some one gets a collar ? " suggested the major , with a hint
of hopefulness in his voice . 

"I know my regiment , " said the colonel . "There isn't enough money
in it three days before pay day to buy a button . They'll send him
out to-night . "

Immediately after drill there was a council of war in Muldoon's
tent , Muldoon holding Scrap between his knees . Scrap's scratched
ear , which habitually stood cocked , flopped forlornly; his stump
tail drooped dismally . The atmosphere of anxiety oppressed his
sensitive spirit . He desired to play , and Muldoon only sat and
rolled his argumentative tongue . From this conference those who
had been present went about the business of the day with a
preternatural gloom that gradually permeated the regiment . The
business of the day was varied , since the next day was to be a
field day , with a review in the morning and cavalry maneuvers in
the afternoon . 

All day Scrap was conspicuous in every quarter of the camp , but at
supper-time the lieutenant of Company A noted his absence from his
habitual place at the left of Muldoon in the men's mess-tent . The
lieutenant was annoyed by his own anxiety . 

"Of course they'll get him out , sir ? " he said to the major . 

"Of course , " the major assented , with more confidence than he felt . 
The colonel was fairly irritable in his uncertainty over it . 

Next morning the sentries , who had been most strictly enjoined to
vigilant observation , reported that no one had left camp that
night , though a man on beat four must have failed in an
extraordinary way to see a private crossing his line six feet in
front of him . 

The muster failed to produce any rag-eared , stub-tailed , 
eager-eyed , collarless yellow cub . Nor did the mess-call raise his
shrill bark in the vicinity of the cook's tent . The lieutenant felt
disappointed . 

He thought that the regiment should at least have made some sort of
demonstration in Scrap's defense . It seemed a poor return for such
confidence and loyalty to be hustled out of the way on an official
threat . 

It seemed to him the regiment was infernally light-hearted , as , 
pipe-clay white and nickel bright in the morning sun , it swung out
of camp for the parade-ground , where the dog-carts and runabouts
and automobiles were gathering from Del Monte and the cottages
along the shore . 

The sight of the twelve companies moving across the field with the
step of one warmed the cockles of the colonel's pride . The regiment
came to parade rest , and the band went swinging past their front , 
past the reviewing-stand . As it wheeled into place , the colonel , 
who had been speaking to the adjutant , who was the lieutenant of
Company A , bit his sentence in the middle , and glared at something
that moved , glittering , at the heels of the drum-major . 

The colonel turned bright red . His glass fell out of his
eye-socket . 

"What the devil is the matter with that dog ? " he whispered softly . 
And the adjutant , who had also seen and was suffocating , managed to
articulate , "Collars ! "

The colonel put his glass back in his eye . His shoulders shook . He
coughed violently as he addressed the adjutant:

"Have that dog removed--no , let him alone--no , adjutant , bring him
here ! "

So the adjutant , biting his lip , motioned Muldoon to fall out . 

Tough old Muldoon tucked Scrap , struggling , squirming , glittering
like a hardware shop , under his arm , and saluted his commander , 
while the review waited . 

The colonel was blinking through his glass and trying not to grin . 

"Sergeant , how many collars has that dog got on ? "

"Thirteen , sor , " said Muldoon . 

"What for ? " said the colonel , severely . 

"Wan for each company , sor , an' wan for the band . "



A FIRE-FIGHTER'S DOG

By Arthur Quiller-Couch

This is the story of a very distinguished member of the London Fire
Brigade--the dog Chance . It proves that the fascinations of fires
 ( and who that has witnessed a fire cannot own this fascination ? ) 
extends even to the brute creation . In old Egypt , Herodotus tells
us , the cats used on the occasion of a conflagration to rush forth
from their burning homes , and then madly attempt to return again;
and the Egyptians , who worshipped the animals , had to form a ring
round to prevent their dashing past and sacrificing themselves to
the flames . This may , however , be due to the cat's notorious love
for home . In the case of the dog Chance another hypothesis has to
be searched for . 

The animal formed his first acquaintance with the brigade by
following a fireman from a conflagration in Shoreditch to the
central station at Watling Street . Here , after he had been petted
for some time by the men , his master came for him and took him
home . But the dog quickly escaped and returned to the central
station on the very first opportunity . He was carried back , 
returned , was carried back again , and again returned . 

At this point his master--"like a mother whose son _will_ go
to sea"--abandoned the struggle and allowed him to follow his own
course . Henceforth for years he invariably went with the engine , 
sometimes upon the carriage itself , sometimes under the horses'
legs; and always , when going uphill , running in advance , and
announcing by his bark the welcome news that the fire-engine was at
hand . 

Arrived at the fire , he would amuse himself with pulling burning
logs of wood out of the flames with his mouth , firmly impressed
that he was rendering the greatest service , and clearly anxious to
show the laymen that he understood all about the business . Although
he had his legs broken half a dozen times , he remained faithful to
the profession he had so obstinately chosen . At last , having taken
a more serious hurt than usual , he was being nursed by the firemen
beside the hearth , when a "call" came . At the well-known sound of
the engine turning out , the poor old dog made a last effort to
climb upon it , and fell back--dead . 

He was stuffed , and preserved at the station for some time . But
even in death he was destined to prove the friend of the brigade . 
For , one of the engineers having committed suicide , the firemen
determined to raffle him for the benefit of the widow , and such was
his fame that he realized 123 pounds 10 shillings , 9 pence , or over
$615 in American money ! 



PLATO: THE STORY OF A CAT

By A . S . Downs

One day last summer a large handsome black cat walked gravely up
one side of Main street , crossed , and went half-way down the other . 
He stopped at a house called The Den , went up the piazza steps , and
paused by an open window . 

A lady sitting inside saw and spoke to him; but without taking any
notice , he put his paws on the sill , looked around the room as if
wondering if it would suit him , and finally gazed into her face . 

After thinking a minute he went in , and from that hour took his
place as an important member of the family . Civil to all , he gives
his love only to the lady whom he first saw; and it is odd to see , 
as he lies by the fire , how he listens to all conversation , but
raises his head only when she speaks , and drops it again when she
has finished , with a pleased air . 

No other person in the house is so wise , for he alone never makes a
mistake . The hours he selects for his exercise are the sunniest;
the carpets he lies upon the softest , and he knows the moment he
enters the room whether his friend will let him lie in her lap , or
whether because of her best gown she will have none of him . No one
at The Den can tell how he came to be called Plato . It is a fact
that he answers to the name , and when asked if so known before he
came there , smiles wisely . "What matters it , " the smile says , "how
I was called , or where I came from , since I am Plato , and am here ? "

He dislikes noise , and entirely disapproves sweeping . A broom and
dustpan fill him with anxiety , and he seeks the soft cushions of
the big lounge; but when these in their turn are beaten and tossed
about , he retreats to the study-table . However , as soon as he
learned that once a week his favorite room was turned into chaos , 
he sought another refuge , and refuses to get up that day until
noon . 

Many were the speculations as to Plato's Christmas present . All
were satisfied with a rattan basket just large enough for him to
lie in , with a light open canopy , cushions of cardinal chintz , and
a cardinal satin bow to which was fastened a lovely card . 

It was set down before Plato , and although it is probable it was
the first he had ever seen , he showed neither surprise nor
curiosity , but looked at it loftily as if such a retreat should
have been given him long ago , for could not any discerning person
see he was accustomed to luxury ? He stepped in carefully and curled
himself gracefully upon the soft cushions , the glowing tints of
which were very becoming to his sable beauty . 

It was soon seen that Plato was very fond of his basket , and was
unwilling to share it in the smallest degree . When little Bessie
put her doll in , "just to see if cardinal was becoming to her , " he
looked so stern and walked so fiercely toward them that dolly's
heart sank within her , and Bessie said , "Please excuse us , Plato . "
If balls and toys were carelessly dropped there he would push them
out without delay , and if visitors took up the basket to examine
it , he would fix his eyes upon them , thinking , "O yes , you would
pick pockets or steal the spoons if I did not watch you . "

As his conduct can never be predicted , great was the curiosity when
one cold afternoon he was noticed walking up the avenue while a
miserable yellow kitten dragged herself after him . She was so thin
you could count her bones , and she had been so pulled and kicked
that there seemed to be nothing of her but length and--dirt . 

When Lord Plato chooses , he enters the front doors , but as he waits
no man's pleasure , unless it pleases him first , he has a way of
getting in on his own account . Upon one of the shed doors is an
old-fashioned latch , which by jumping he can reach and lift with
his paw . Having opened the door , he pushed his poor yellow
straggler in and followed himself . She laid down at once on the
floor , and Plato began washing her with his rough tongue , while the
lookers-on assisted his hospitality by bringing a saucer of milk . 
While she ate Plato rested , looking as pleased as if he were her
mother at her enjoyment . The luncheon finished , the washing was
resumed , and as the waif was now able to help , she soon looked more
respectable . But Plato had not finished his work of mercy . He
looked at the door leading to the parlor , then at her; and finally
bent down tenderly to her little torn ears , as if whispering , but
she would not move . Perhaps in all her wretched life she had never
been so comfortable , and believed in letting well enough alone . 
Reason and persuasion alike useless , Plato concluded to try force
and , taking her by the back of the neck , carried her through the
house and dropped her close to his dainty cherished basket . 

Then he appeared a little uncertain what to do . The basket was nice
and warm; he was tired and cold; it had been a present to him; the
street wanderer was dirty still; and the rug would be a softer bed
than she had ever known . Were these his thoughts , and was it
selfishness he conquered when at last he lifted the shivering
homeless creature into his own beautiful nest ? 



PETER: A CAT O' ONE TAIL

By Charles Morley

Peter , the admirable cat whose brief history I am about to relate , 
appeared in the world on a terrible winter's night . A fierce
snowstorm was raging , the sleet was driving at a terrific rate
through the air , and the streets were banked up with snow-drifts . 
All traffic had been stopped , the roar of London was hushed , and
every one who had the merest pretence of a fireside sought it on
this memorable occasion . It was a wild night in the city , a wild
night in the country , a wild night at sea , and certainly a most
unpropitious night for the birth of a cat , an animal which is
always associated with home and hearth . The fact remains that Peter
was born on the night of one of the most terrible storms on record . 

Our chairs were drawn up to the fire , the tea-things were on
the table , and my mother was just about to try the strength
of the brew , when Ann Tibbits , our faithful and well-tried
maid-of-all-work , bounced into the room without knocking at the
door . Her cap was all awry , her hair was dishevelled , and she
gasped for breath as she addressed herself to my mother thus , 
in spasms:

"Please--ma'am--the cat has put her kittens--in--your--bonnet ! "

Such a breach of discipline had never been known before in our prim
household , where there was a place for everything , and everything
had a place . 

My mother pushed her spectacles on to her forehead , and , looking
severely at Ann , said: "_Which_ one , Ann ? My summer bonnet , 
or--my winter bonnet ? "

"The one with the fur lining , ma'am . "

"And a most comfortable bonnet to live in , I'm sure ! " replied my
mother sarcastically , as much as to say that she wished all cats
had such a choice under the circumstances . "Another cat would have
chosen the one with the lace and the violets , out of sheer
perverseness . But there--I _knew_ I could depend on a cat
which had been trained in _my_ house . "

My mother poured out a cup of tea , betraying no agitation
as she dropped two lumps of sugar into the cup--her customary
allowance--and helped herself to cream . In a minute or two , 
however , she took up her knitting , and I noticed that two stitches
in succession were dropped , a sure sign that she was perturbed in
spirit . Suddenly my mother turned her eyes to the fire . 

"_How many_ , Ann ? " she continued , addressing our faithful
servant , who still remained standing at the table awaiting her
orders . 

"Seven , ma'am . "

"_Seven ! _" cried my mother . "Seven--it's outrageous . Why , my
bonnet wouldn't hold 'em ! "

"Three in the bonnet , ma'am , and two in your new m-u-f-f ! "

"My new muff ! " cried my mother . "I _knew_ you were keeping
something back . " And the stitches dropped fast and furious . "That's
only _five_ , Ann , " she continued , looking up from her work . 
"Where are the other two ? I insist upon knowing . "

"In the Alaska tail boa , ma'am , " responded Ann , timidly . 

Slowly my mother's wrath evaporated , and her features settled down
to their ordinary aspect of composure . 

"Well , " she said , "it might have been worse . She might have put
them in my silk dress . But there--it is evident that something must
be done . I'm a kind woman , I hope , but I'm not going to be
responsible for seven young and tender kittens . Ann Tibbits , 
England expects every woman to do her duty ! "

"_All ? _ asked Ann . 

"_Four_ , " replied my mother . 

"Now ? " asked Ann . 

"The sooner the better , " said my mother . 

At this moment a sudden blast shook every window in the house , 
which seemed to be in momentary danger of a total collapse . 

"Not fit to turn a dog out , " murmured my mother . "Not fit to turn a
dog out . Ugh ! how cold it is , and here am I condemning to death
four poor little kittens on a night like this--to snatch them away
from their warm mother , my muff , and Alaska tail , and dip them in a
bucket of ice-cold water . And yet they must go; but , Ann , I've an
idea--WARM the water . They shall leave the world comfortably . 
They'll never know it . "

The faithful , unemotional Ann carried out her instructions . Peter
was one of the three kittens which were born in my mother's
fur-lined bonnet , and the white marks on his body always remind me
of the terrible snowstorm in the midst of which he sounded his
first mew . 

After several weeks the liberty which our cat Cordelia had taken
with my mother's finery was forgotten , and the household had
settled down into its usual humdrum routine . Tibbits had made the
new arrivals a bed in the little box-room , and the doctor declared
that Mrs . Cordelia was doing as well as could be expected . Every
morning we had asked the usual question: "How is Cordelia ? " "Quite
well , thank you . " "And the kittens ? " "Also quite well . " In due
course Ann brought the welcome news that the three kittens had
opened their eyes , and the kid glove was at once detached from the
knocker of the front door . It was on the morning after they had
obtained their blessed sight that I was invited by Tibbits to go
downstairs and take my choice . I went down , but I could see nothing
of the kittens; there was only Cordelia , with tail twisting , eyes
aflame , and whiskers bristling , wheeling round and round a number
of straw cases in which champagne had once been packed . Lo ! one of
the cases began to walk . The movement caught Cordelia's eye , and
she knocked it over with her paw . A fluffy , chubby kitten , 
consisting of a black body with a patch of white on it , was
revealed . The little one so captivated my fancy that I put him in
my pocket , and without more ado took him upstairs , and publicly
announced my determination to claim him as my property . 

"What shall we name it ? " asked my mother . 

"Fiz , " said one , alluding to the empty champagne cases , --a
suggestion which was at once overruled , as we were a temperate
family and little given to sparkling liquids . "Pop" was also voted
against , not only as being vulgar , but as going to the other
extreme , and leading people to suppose that we were extensively
addicted to ginger-ale . 

"I think , my dears , as Peter was born on a--" My mother's speech
was interrupted by an exultant "Cock-a-doodle-do . "

"That horrid fowl again ! " exclaimed my mother . 

The cock in question was the property of a neighbor , and was a most
annoying bird . Even my kitten was disturbed by the defiant note . 
"_M-e-w ? _" said he , in a meek interrogative , as much as to
say , "What _is_ that dreadful noise ? "

"Cock-a-doodle-do , " cried the bird again . 

"Mew , " replied the kitten , this time with a note of anger in his
voice . "COCK-A-DOODLE , " screamed the bird , evidently in a violent
temper . "Mew , " said the kitten again , in a tone of remonstrance . 
The remaining syllable of his war-cry and the kitten's reply were
cut short by my mother , who put her fingers to her ears , and said:

"And the cock crowed thrice . My dears , I have it ! "

"What , mother ? "

"We'll call him PETER . " cried the family . 

"Peter Gray ? "

"Peter Simple ? "

"Peter the Great ? "

"No , " replied my mother , with a humorous twinkle , "Peter the
Apostle , " pointing to the Family Bible , which was always kept on a
little occasional table in a corner of the sitting-room . "And let
Peter be a living warning against fibbing , my dears , whether on a
small scale or a large one . "

A bowl of water was then placed on the table and , having sprinkled
a shower upon his devoted back , I as his proprietor , looking at him
closely , cried:

"Arise , Peter; obey thy master . "

In the middle of my exhortations , however , Cordelia jumped on the
table , took little Peter by the scruff of his neck , and carried him
back to the nursery . 

The day came when I put Peter into the pocket of my overcoat , and
took him away to his new home . I had the greatest confidence in
him , being a firm believer in the doctrine of heredity . His father
I never knew , but his grandfather bore a great reputation for
courage , as was indicated on his tombstone , the inscription on
which ran as follows:

 Here lies LEAR . Aged about 8 years . A Tom Cat killed in
 single combat with Tom the Templar whilst defending his
 hearth and home . England expects every cat to do his
 duty . 

His mother Cordelia was of an affectionate nature , caring little
for the chase , indifferent to birds ( except sparrows ) , temperate in
the matter of fish , timid of dogs , a kind mother , and had never
been known to scratch a child . I believed then that there was every
possibility of Peter's inheriting the admirable qualities of his
relatives . The world into which he was introduced contained a large
assortment of curios which I had bought in many a salesroom , such
as bits of old oak , bits of armor , bits of china , bits of tapestry , 
and innumerable odds and ends which had taken my fancy . Picture , 
then , Peter drinking his milk from a Crown Derby dish which I had
placed in a corner between the toes of a gentleman skeleton whom
Time had stained a tobacco brown . The Crown Derby dish and the
skeleton were , like the rest of my furniture , "bargains . " At this
period of his life Peter resembled a series of irregular circles , 
such as a geometrician might have made in an absent moment: two
round eyes , one round head , and one round body . I regarded him much
as a young mother would her first baby , for he was my first pet . I
watched him lest he should get into danger; I conversed with him in
a strange jargon , which I called cats' language; I played with him
constantly , and introduced him to a black hole behind the
skeleton's left heel , which was supposed to be the home of mice . He
kept a close watch on the black hole , and one day , which is never
to be forgotten , he caught his first mouse . It was a very little
one , but it clung to Peter's nose and made it bleed . Regardless of
the pain , Peter marched up to me , tail in air , and laid the
half-dead mouse at my feet , with a look in his eyes which said
plainly enough , "Shades of Caesar ! I claim a Triumph , master . "

He returned to the black hole again , and mewed piteously for more . 
Peter was very green , as you will understand , but he soon
discovered that mewing kept the mice away , and having taken the
lesson to heart , preserved silence for the future . The mouse-hunts
occupied but a small portion of Peter's time . He was full of queer
pranks , which youth and high spirits suggested to him . He took a
delight in tumbling down the stairs; he hid himself in the mouth of
a lion whose head was one of my chief treasures; he tilted against
a dragon candlestick like a young St . George; he burnt his budding
whiskers in an attempt to discover the source of the flame in the
wick of the candle . He became , too , a great connoisseur of vases , 
ornaments , and pictures , sitting before them and examining them for
an hour at a time . He was also very much given to voyages of
discovery , dark continents having a peculiar fascination for him . 
Even the lion's mouth had no terror for him . I once produced him
from the interior of a brand-new top hat like a conjurer an
omelette . Again , we were very much surprised at breakfast one
morning to see Peter walk out of a rabbit-pie in which he had
secreted himself . 

I used to let my canary fly about the room , and Peter chased him . 
The canary flew to an old helmet on a shelf , and thus baffled
Peter . The canary seemed to know this , for when Peter was in the
room he always flew to the helmet and sang in peace . If he perched
elsewhere there was a chase . The linnet's cage I placed on the
window-sill in sunny weather , and Peter took great interest in him . 
He could not see the musician , but he heard the music , and tried
every means he knew to discover its source . 

At last he peeped through a little hole at the back of the cage , 
and when he saw the bird he was quite satisfied , and made no
attempt to disturb it . 

In the matter of eating and drinking Peter was inclined to
vegetarianism , being fond of beet-root and cabbage , but he soon
took to carnal habits , always liking his food to be divided into
three portions , consisting of greens , potatoes , and meat . In
addition to such food as we gave him he by no means despised any
delicacies he could discover on his own account . For instance he
cleaned out a pot of glycerine . Having tilted the lid up , he pulled
out the pins from a pincushion , but was saved in time; he was
curious about a powder-box , and came mewing downstairs a Peter in
white; he did not despise the birds out of a hat; he lost his
temper when he saw his rival in the looking-glass , and was beside
himself with rage when the glass swung round and he saw only a
plain board . His most curious experience was his first glimpse of
the moon , which he saw from our bit of back garden . He was rooted
to the ground with wonder at the amazing sight , and we called him
in vain . The only reply was a melancholy , love-stricken mew which
went to my heart . 

 * * * * *

So Peter rejoiced in the days of his youth , and there was no end to
his frolics . But do not think for a moment that his education was
neglected , especially in the invaluable matters of manners and
deportment , both of which are so essential to advancement in life . 
I taught him to sit at table; to enter a room with grace , and to
leave it with dignity . Indeed , I spared no trouble , and Peter
became as rigorous as a Chesterfield in the proper observance of
all such matters . I can give you no better example of Peter's
extensive knowledge of what was right and wrong in the ceremonial
side of life than by telling you that when he felt an irrepressible
sneeze forming he trotted out of the room and sneezed outside . When
Peter played , too , he played gently , and did not disturb his elders
by obtrusive attentions . He never required to be told twice to do a
thing . Once was enough for Peter . Then again in the matter of
breakages he was as virtuous a kitten as ever lived . I had thirty
precious blue china vases on my sideboard , and through this fragile
maze Peter always wound in and out without moving a vase . His
virtues in this respect were well known to my servants , who never
accused Peter of breaking the milk-jug , or the cups and saucers , I
can assure you . Like the best of human beings , he had his faults , 
but upon these it would be impertinent to touch more than lightly . 

Peter was partial to Fridays , because Fridays were devoted to
cleaning up . If you have ever watched a woman washing the kitchen
floor , you will have noticed that she completes one patch before
she proceeds with the next , as if she took pride in each patch , 
regarding it as a picture . It was Peter's delight to sit and watch
this domestic operation; and no sooner was the woman's back turned
towards a fresh portion of her territory than Peter ran all over
the freshly washed patch and impressed it with the seal of his
paws , just as an explorer would indicate a great annexation by a
series of flags . That was a mere frolic . It was about this time
that I discovered Peter's power as a performing cat . I tied a
hare's foot to a piece of string and dangled it before Peter's
eyes . I hid the hare's foot in strange places . I flung it
downstairs . I threw it upstairs . The hare's foot never failed to
attract him . We used to roll on the floor together; we played
hide-and-seek together . I noticed that he had a habit of lying on
his back with his tail out , his head back , and his paws crossed . By
degrees I taught him to assume this attitude at the word of
command , so that when I said , "Die , Peter ! " Peter turned on his
back and became rigid until he received permission to live again . 

I also taught him to talk in mews at the word of command . I hear
some genial critic exclaim that this cannot be true . I decline to
argue with any critic that ever lived , and repeat , fearlessly , and
in measured terms , that Peter talked to _me . _ Of course he
would not drop into conversation with the first person who bade him
"good-morning , " but I assert again that Peter and I held many
conversations together by means of the "mew , " used with a score of
inflections , often delicately shaded , each of which conveyed its
meaning to me . 

Peter took to reading , too , quite easily , and sat up with
eye-glasses on his nose and a paper between his paws . It was , as
you may well imagine , a red-letter day with me when Peter said his
prayers for the first time; and I was better pleased when he put
his little paws up and lifted his eyes up to the ceiling than with
any other of his accomplishments , though they were more appreciated
by unthinking friends . It was all very well to place a mouse at my
feet and thus play to the gallery , but I felt that Peter's thirst
for applause might be his ruin . 

 * * * * *

When the summer came , and the London pavements began to quake with
heat , I determined to fly to the country . As delights are doubled
when shared with those we care for , I determined to take Peter with
me , so I packed him up in a specially constructed travelling saloon
of his own , to wit , a flannel-lined basket containing all the
necessary comforts for the journey , such as air-holes and
feeding-bottles , and off we started in the highest of spirits . 
Peter found a new world opened to him , and the thousand and one
beauties of the country fascinated us both . We were the guests of a
burly farmer , who lived in a queer old house , half timber and half
brick , with low-ceilinged rooms . The general living-room was the
capacious kitchen , which looked mighty picturesque . Oak panels ran
half-way up to the ceiling; the pots and pans were ranged neatly in
an open cupboard , pleasantly suggestive of good fare and plenty of
it . There were flowers in red pots in the windows , and my bedroom
was a picture of coolness and cleanliness . 

Amid these pleasant surroundings Peter soon made himself very
happy , and became a great friend of a cat called Jack , who took him
under his charge and showed him the ways of the country . Jack was a
favorite on the farm . He was certainly given to roving , and did not
always "come home to tea . " As a mouser he had few equals in the
countryside , and one evening when we were telling stories by the
fireside the farmer told me that Jack had despatched no less than
four hundred mice from one hay-rick . 

Jack was a disciple of Isaak Walton . He would crouch on a mossy
knoll by the edge of the river , and sometimes was successful in
capturing a small trout . The farmer was himself a great fisherman . 
Jack was a study while the preparations were in progress , and , all
intent , would follow close at his master's heels . He would crouch
among the rushes whilst the tackle was being adjusted , and
anxiously scan the water as the fly drifted along the surface . He
took a keen delight in the sport , and when a fish was negotiating
the bait he always purred loudly in anticipation of the feast in
prospect . The trout landed and the line re-cast , he would seize his
prey , and with stealthy gait slink off with his prize , leaving the
old farmer to discover his loss when he might . Together Jack and
Peter roamed over the meadow lands , and the poultry-run was an
object of great interest to them . Together they fought the rats , 
and together they would lie in wait for the thrush and the
blackbird , --I am happy to say in vain . The farmer told me that in
his youth Jack once took up his residence in the hollow of an old
oak , where he lived on the furred and feathered game . At last he
returned home . For hours he wandered about his old home , fearful of
discovery , now crouching amongst the flower-beds , and now flying in
terror at the sound of the hall clock . At last he ventured into the
kitchen , entering by the window and creeping to the kitchen hearth , 
where he dozed off to the music of the cricket , to be welcomed like
another Prodigal Son . 

Alas ! these delights were cut short , for Peter and I were soon
compelled to pack up our traps and proceed to the seaside for
professional purposes . Peter was not fond of the sea . When I took
him out yachting he was compelled to call for the steward; and one
day when exploring the rocks at low water , gazing with rapture at
his own charming face as it was reflected in the glassy surface of
a deep pool , an inquiring young lobster nipped his tail , and the
shore rang with piteous calls for help . Peter has never cared for
the sea since then , and so deeply was the disaster impressed upon
him that I have known him reject a choice bit of meat which
happened to have a few grains of salt on it . It wafted him back to
the ocean , the lobster , and the steward . What powers of imagination
were Peter's ! 

 * * * * *

As these memoirs cover a period of seven or eight years , and as
space is limited , my readers will kindly consent to take a seat on
the convenient carpet of the magician , and be wafted gently to the
next station on the road without further question . This is a
pleasant byway in suburban London , greatly frequented by
organ-grinders , travelling bears , German bands , and peripatetic
white mice . This road is always associated in my mind with the
mysterious disappearance of Peter . We had often laughed at the odd
old lady who lived two doors higher up , for the anxiety which she
displayed when any of her pets were missing . It was our turn now . 

This same old lady was very fond of her cats , and had nine of them
at the time I am writing of . Every morning when the weather was
warm , she and her cats would come out and unconsciously form a
succession of tableaux for our amusement . A rug was spread out
under the pear tree in the middle of the tiny lawn , a great
basket-chair was placed in the middle of this rug , and , these
preparations having been made , the old lady , who was very stout , 
and always wore a monster poke bonnet and a shapeless black silk
dress , came out , followed by her nine cats , and took possession of
the basket-chair . A little maid then appeared with a tray , on which
were nine little blue china saucers and a jug of milk . The nine
little saucers were ranged in a semicircle , and filled with milk , 
whereupon the old lady cried out , "Who says breakfast , dearies ? Who
says breakfast--breakfast ? " This invitation was immediately
responded to by the nine cats . When they had done the old lady
cried , "Who says washee , dearies ? Washee , washee , washee ? "
Whereupon the nine cats sat on their haunches and proceeded to make
their toilettes . The requirements of cleanliness having been
satisfied , and the nine basins having been taken away by the little
maid , the old lady shouted out , "Who says play , dearies ? Playee , 
playee , playee ? " holding out her arms , and calling out , "Dido Dums , 
Dido Dums , come here , deary , " when a fine Persian cat jumped on to
her right shoulder . "Now Diddles Doddles , Diddles Doddles , " and
another Persian cat jumped on to her left shoulder . "Tootsy
Wootsy , " she called once more , and a black cat scrambled up to the
crown of the poke bonnet . And one by one they were summoned by some
endearing diminutive , until the nine cats had taken possession of
every possible coign of vantage which was offered by the old lady's
capacious person . There they sat , waving their tails to and fro , 
evidently very pleased by their mistress's little attentions . Mrs . 
Mee was not very popular in the neighborhood , except with the
milkman and the butcher . The cats'-meat-man , indeed , who supplied
various families in our road , positively hated her--so I gathered
from our servant , --and had been heard to say _sotto voce_ in
unguarded moments , "Ha ! ha ! I'll be revenged . " It was not
unnatural , as the cats were fed on mutton cutlets and fresh milk , 
and cats' meat was at a discount . About three weeks before Peter
disappeared , Mrs . Mee , in the short space of three or four days , 
had lost no less than five cats by a violent death , and five little
graves had been dug , marked by five little tombstones , and the five
dead cats had been laid in their last resting-places by the hands
of the old lady herself . A funeral is not generally amusing , but I
could not restrain a smile when I saw my eccentric old neighbor
follow the remains of her dead pets , which were reverently carried
on the tea-tray by the little serving-maid , the old lady herself
leading the way , ringing a muffled peal with the dinner-bell , the
remaining cats bringing up the rear , pondering over the fate of
their dead comrades . 

It happened that three of these unfortunate victims had been found
on my doorstep . I felt very angry with the old lady , who blamed me
for the destruction of her pets , adducing the fact that they were
found dying on my doorsteps as proof conclusive . One morning I
received an anonymous postcard . Although it bore the Charing Cross
postmark , I felt sure it came from the old lady . It read as
follows:

 "The Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold . "

This was the last straw , for I felt that as regards the old lady's
cats I had behaved in a sympathetic and neighborly spirit . I
remember this post-card because the same afternoon that it came
Peter disappeared , and I began to fear that he had yielded to the
temptation of a poisoned pig's foot which had been found in my
garden stripped of its flesh . This was a delicacy which Peter had
never been able to resist , though why he should have preferred it
to the choice foods that were daily piled upon his plate I cannot
for the life of me say . We searched the neighborhood in vain , and
at last I determined to advertise . Accordingly I addressed an
advertisement to my favorite paper . It ran as follows:

 "COME BACK , PETER . Lost , stolen , strayed , or poisoned , a white
 and black cat called Peter , who left his friends at--on Monday
 afternoon last . Round his neck he wore a blue ribbon with the word
 PETER embroidered upon it in red silk . Before retiring to rest he
 always says his prayers . Dead or alive , a reward of Two Pounds is
 offered to any one who will restore him to his mourning friends . "

I little knew what I was bringing on my devoted head . I had been
troubled enough before with dying cats , but now they were all
alive . Cats were brought to me in baskets , in boxes , in arms; Manx
cats and cats whose tails were missing for other than hereditary
reasons; lame cats , blind cats , cats with one eye , and cats who
squinted . Never before had I seen such an extraordinary collection . 
My whole time was now taken up in interviewing callers with cats . 

If the boys were bad before , they were a thousand times worse now . 
Here is one example out of a score . He was a boy known as Pop , who
carried the laundry baskets . 

"'Ave yer found yer cat yet ? "

"No , we haven't . "

"Did yer say it was a yaller 'un ? "

"No , I didn't . "

"What did I say , Hop ? " continued Pop , triumphantly turning to a
one-legged friend who swept a crossing close by . 

"Yer said , Pop , as it was a tortus , " murmured the bashful Hop , who
had sheltered himself behind Pop . 

"A tortus , that's it . A tortus , and Hop and _I's_ found it , 
sir . We've got it here . "

"You're wrong . My cat's _not_ a tortoise , " I replied . 

"Bless you , we know that , guv'nor . Just as if we didn't know Peter ! 
Ah ! Peter was a cat as wants a lot of replacin' , Peter does . But me
and Hop's got a tortus as is a wunner , guv'nor . A heap better nor
Peter . Poor old Peter ! he's dead and gone . Be sure of that . This
'ere's a reg'lar bad road . A prize-winner , warn't 'e , Hoppy ? " They
held up the prize-winner , who was _not_ a tortoise , and was
mangy . 

"Look here , my boys , you can take her away . Now , be off . Quick
march ! "

"Yer don't want it , guv'nor . Jest think agin . Why , 'ow will you get
along without a cat ? The mice is 'orrible in this 'ere road . Come , 
guv'nor , I'll tell you what I'll do . You shall 'ave a bargain , "
said Pop . 

I insisted that the tortoise prize-winner should be taken away , and
the next day I stopped the advertisement and resigned myself to
despair . A week after Peter had disappeared I heard the voice of my
friend Pop at the door . "I say , mister , I've some noose . Come along
o' me . I think I've found 'im . Real . A blue ribbon round 'is neck
and says 'is prayers . Put on yer 'at and foller , foller , foller
me . " Mr . Pop led the way along the road , and turned off to the
right , and we walked up another road until we reached a large house
which had been unoccupied for many months . The drains were up , and
two or three workmen were busy . Pop at once introduced me as "the
gent as was lookin' for his cat . " "Have you seen a cat with a blue
ribbon round his neck ? " I asked them , very dubious as to the
honesty of Pop's intention . "Well , sich a cat _'as_ bin 'ere
for some days , " replied the workman to whom I had spoken . "He used
to come when we were gettin' our bit of dinner . But we never know'd
but wot it came from next door . You go upstairs to the first-floor
front , and you'll see a sight . " On the top of the stairs was Peter , 
who knew me at once , and began to purr and rub himself against my
legs in a most affectionate manner , as if to appease any outburst
of wrath on my part . I felt too pleased to be angry , and followed
Peter into the empty room , which was littered with paper and
rubbish , and the remains of forty or fifty mice lay strewn about
the floor . Peter looked up to me as if to say: "Not a bad bag--eh , 
master ? " In the corner of the room was a bit of sacking which Peter
had used as a bed . Pop explained to me that he had heard the men
talking about the funny cat that came and dined with them every
day . This conversation induced him to search the house , with the
happy result that Peter was restored to the bosom of his sorrowing
family , and Pop gave up the laundry basket , and invested the reward
in a small private business of his own . 

 * * * * *

Peter and I have had many homes in London and in the country . 
Together we have lived in flats , in hotels , in farm-houses , and in
lodgings for single gentlemen . In lodgings for single gentlemen we
had many strange experiences which would occupy too much time to
relate , and I will therefore touch but lightly upon this period of
Peter's career . Peter , being a gentlemanly cat , never quarrelled
with ladies , however hard they might be to please , and let them
gird at him as they would . For did not that gracious animal , when
Mrs . Nagsby was accusing him of stealing fowls , say--did he not
arch his bonny back and purr against Mrs . Nagsby's ankles and
endeavor to appease her ? In her softer moods she did sometimes
relax , and even allowed Peter to sit by her side as she read the
paper . Peter was held responsible for every article that was lost
in Mrs . Nagsby's apartments , and the amount of money I paid to that
good lady for breakage in the course of six months would have
furnished a small cottage . Mrs . Nagsby was a widow , and the late
lamented Nagsby had supported her by his performances on the
euphonium . This instrument was kept in a case in Mrs . Nagsby's
little room , which was on the ground-floor back , and looked on to a
series of dingy walls . Mrs . Nagsby used to polish up the euphonium
every Saturday morning with a regularity which nothing prevented . 
Did it not speak volumes for her affection for the late lamented ? 
On one of these Saturdays it happened that a German band stopped at
the front door . Mrs . Nagsby could never resist the seductive power
of brass music . She rushed upstairs to the first-floor front to
listen to the performance . Fate ordained it that Mrs . Nagsby should
leave the precious euphonium on the floor in her haste to hear the
band . Fate ordained it also that Peter should come down stairs at
this particular moment and wend his way to Mrs . Nagsby's parlor . 
Fate also had ordained it that a mouse which lived in a hole behind
Mrs . Nagsby's easy-chair should issue at this particular moment for
a little bread-crumb expedition . Mrs . Nagsby was a careful
housekeeper , and finding no crumbs about , the mouse roamed into the
silent highway presented by the orifice of the euphonium . It was
natural enough that Peter should follow the mouse . Unfortunately , 
Peter's progress was stopped , the girth of his body being too great
to admit him; and my door being open , I at once rushed to the
rescue , and found Peter with his head in the depths of the
euphonium , and making fierce struggles to vacate the position . Mrs . 
Nagsby came downstairs and entered her parlor just as I succeeded
in extracting Peter from the musical instrument . Fiercely was I
reproached for Peter's escapade , and humbly did I make his
apologies , little knowing the secret of the plight from which I had
rescued him . Having soothed my landlady , she at length took up the
euphonium and proceeded to apply her eye to the main orifice to see
if Peter had damaged it , handling the euphonium in the manner of a
telescope . I was thinking of the reproaches in prospect , when I was
startled by a loud shriek , to which the euphonium imparted a
metallic vibration , and Mrs . Nagsby dropped the instrument on to
the floor , the good lady herself following it with a thud . A wee
mouse scuttled across her face , disappeared behind the easy chair , 
and doubtless rejoined his anxious family . Mrs . Nagsby recovered
after her maid-of-all-work and I had burnt a few sheets of brown
paper under her nostrils; but I had great difficulty in making the
peace . 

In vain I pointed out that the responsibility did not remain with
me , or even with Peter . We agreed after some debate that it was the
German band , which was never afterwards patronized by Mrs . Nagsby . 

I got into further trouble with Mrs . Nagsby owing to a greyhound
which I had bought at a sale . I had no character with him , for he
had no character . If Mrs . Nagsby had killed him with the meat
hatchet I would have held my peace , for never a day passed but King
Arthur took his name in vain . The first night I brought him home
Mrs . Nagsby gave me permission as a great favor to chain him to the
kitchen table . In the morning two of the table legs had been
mangled , and that is our reason why I called him King Arthur , of
the Round Table . The next night King Arthur was taken upstairs and
attached to the leg of my wash-stand . I was awakened out of my
beauty sleep by a horrible clamor which caused me to think that the
house had fallen in . I presently realized that King Arthur had
mistaken the water-jug for a dragon . In any case it was smashed to
bits , and the noise brought Mrs . Nagsby to my door in anger . I
should be sorry to say what King Arthur cost me in hard cash for
breakages and legs of mutton . Poor Peter ! thou wast a saint when
compared with that fiend on four legs . 

The _denouement_ came at last , and it arose from King Arthur's
fondness for the ladies . There was nothing remarkable in the
appearance of the old lady who was Mrs . Nagsby's favorite lodger , 
who had held the rooms above mine for three years . Rut the lady had
a most beautiful sealskin jacket , trimmed with tails of sable . King
Arthur had unluckily a feminine affection for furs , and I never
dared to take him into any of the fashionable thoroughfares , as he
had a way of following the ladies , not for their own dear sakes , 
but for the fur which they might happen to be wearing . Whether they
were only tippets or dyed rabbit-skins , it did not matter to King
Arthur . 

Well , one unfortunate afternoon , I was leading my greyhound home . A
few yards in front of us was Mrs . Nagsby's first-floor lady , taking
the sun in all the glories of her sealskin jacket and sable tails . 
To my horror I dropped the chain in taking a match-box out of my
pocket , and before I could take any steps to prevent him--_King
Arthur was coursing Mrs . Nagsby's first-floor lodger at his highest
rate of speed ! ! ! _ King Arthur held on his course and literally
took the old lady aback , and began to tear those choice sable
tippets asunder . Nor was the base creature content to rest at the
sable tippets . Before I reached his victim his mouth was full of
sealskin . Let me pass on , merely saying that King Arthur was shot
that night in the mews at the back of Mrs . Nagsby's , a victim to
his own indiscretions . 

And now I come to the fatal catastrophe which finally drove me and
Peter from the shelter of Mrs . Nagsby's roof . That lady had a set
of false teeth which she was in the habit of depositing on her
dressing-table when she went to bed . I had learned this from Sarah
when that damsel was in a confidential mood . Peter , I think I have
told you , slept in my room . One very warm night Mrs . Nagsby left
her door open , and her night light was burning as usual . I also
slept with my door open , and Peter , being hot like the rest of us , 
left the room for a stroll , and visited Mrs . Nagsby's apartment . 
Presently he came back with Mrs . Nagsby's teeth between his own--at
least I suppose so , for I found them on the hearth-rug when I
awoke . I was greatly amused , though a little puzzled to know how I
could replace them . After some reflection I went down to breakfast , 
placed the trophy in a saucer , and showed it to Sarah , who screamed
and traitorously ran up and informed her mistress . Mrs . Nagsby came
down rampant , but of course speechless . I was thankful for this;
but the violent woman , after sputtering spasmodically , caught sight
of the missing article in the saucer , and , lost to all sense of
shame , replaced it in position and poured forth a torrent of the
most violent abuse . 

Peter and I left . 



JEFF THE INQUISITIVE

By General Rush C . Hawkins

Among the gunboats doing duty on the inland waters of North
Carolina in the early spring of 1862 , which composed what Commodore
Goldsborough designated his "Pasteboard Fleet , " was the
_Louisiana_ , commanded by Commander Alexander Murray , who was
noted for his efficiency and good nature . 

His treatment of his crew made him one of the most popular officers
in the whole fleet . He entered into all of their sports and
sympathized with the discomforts of forecastle life . He was fond of
animal pets , and always welcomed the arrival of a new one . At the
time of which I am writing , his ship carried quite a collection of
tame birds and four-footed favorites . Among them was a singular
little character , known as "Jeff . " He was a perfectly black pig of
the "Racer Razor Back" order , which , at that time , were plentiful
in the coast sections of the more southern of the slave-holding
States . They were called "racers" because of their long legs , 
slender bodies , and great capacity for running; and "Razor Backs"
on account of the prominence of the spinal column . The origin of
this particular species of the porcine tribe is unknown , but there
is a tradition to the effect that their progenitors were a part of
the drove that came to the coast of Florida with De Soto when he
started on the march which ended with the discovery of the
Mississippi River . History records the fact that a large number of
animals were brought from Spain for food , and that a considerable
number of them succeeded in getting away from the expedition soon
after the landing was effected . 

Our particular specimen of this wandering tribe of natural
marauders was captured by a boat's crew of the _Louisiana_ in
one of the swamps adjacent to Currituck Sound when he was a wee bit
of an orphaned waif , not much larger than an ostrich egg . 

He was an ill-conditioned little mite that had probably been
abandoned by a heartless mother , possibly while escaping from the
prospective mess-kettle of a Confederate picket . 

In those days Confederate pickets were not very particular as to
the quality or kind of food , and I have a suspicion that even a
"Razor Back" would have been a welcome addition to their meal . 

When "Jeff" was brought on board , his pitiful condition excited the
active sympathy of all , from the commander down to the smallest
powder monkey , and numerous were the suggestions made as to the
course of treatment for the new patient . The doctor was consulted , 
and after a careful diagnosis , decided there was no organic
disease: want of parental care , want of nourishment and exposure , 
were held responsible for "Jeff's" unfavorable condition . It was
decided to put him on a light diet of milk , which proved an
immediate success , for , within forty-eight hours after his first
meal , the patient became as lively as possible . As days and weeks
went on , there appeared an improvement of appetite that was quite
phenomenal , but no accumulation of flesh . His legs and body grew
longer; and , with this lengthening of parts , there came a
development of intellectual acuteness that was particularly
surprising . He attached himself to each individual of the ship . He
had no favorites , but was hail-fellow-well-met with all . He
developed all the playful qualities of a puppy and reasoned out a
number of problems in his own way . His particular admirers declared
that he learned the meaning of the different whistles of the
boatswain: that he knew when the meal pennant was hoisted to the
peak; could tell when the crew was beat to quarters for drill , and
often proved the correctness of this knowledge by scampering off to
take his place by one particular gun division , which seemed to have
taken his fancy . 

I can testify personally to only one item in the schedule of his
intellectual achievements . It is a custom in the navy for the
commander of a ship to receive any officer of rank of either branch
of the service at the gangway of the ship . In this act of courtesy
he is always accompanied by the officer of the deck , and often by
others that may happen to be at hand . After the advent of "Jeff , "
whenever I went on board the _Louisiana , _ he was always at the
gangway , and seemingly was deeply interested in the event . It may
be said of him , generally , that he was overflowing with spirits , 
and took an active interest in all the daily routine work of his
ship . 

He had a most pertinacious way of poking his nose into all sorts of
affairs , not at all after the manner of the usual pig , but more
like a village gossip who wants to know about everything that is
going on in the neighborhood . 

In the gradual development of "Jeff's" character , it was discovered
that he had none of the usual well-known traits of the pig . He was
more like a petted and pampered dog , was playful , good-natured , and
expressed pleasure , pain , anger , and desire , with various squeals
and grunts , delivered with a variety of intonations that were very
easily interpreted . He was never so happy as when in the lap of one
of the sailors , having his back stroked . His pleasure upon those
occasions was evinced by the emission of frequent good-natured
grunts and looking up into the face of the friendly stroker . 

When on shore he followed his favorites like a dog and was never
known to root . Except in speech and appearance he was the
counterpart of a happy , good-natured , and well-cared-for household
dog--possibly , however , rather more intelligent than the average
canine pet . 

The Fourth of July , 1862 , was a gala day at Roanoke Island . The
camps of the island and the vessels in the harbor were in holiday
attire . Colors were flying , bands playing , drums beating , patriotic
steam was up to high pressure . The good old day , so dear to the
hearts of Americans , was made more glorious by the exchange of camp
hospitalities and an indulgence in such simple hilarity as the
occasion seemed to require; but "Jeff" was not forgotten . Early in
the morning he was bathed and scrubbed , more than to his heart's
content , and then patriotically decorated . In his right ear was a
red ribbon , in his left a white one; around his neck another of
blue . 

Thus adorned he was brought on shore to pay me a visit , and as he
came through my door he appeared to be filled with the pride of
patriotism and a realization of the greatness of the occasion . His
reward for this unusual demonstration was instantaneous , and
consisted of some apples and a toothsome dessert of sugar . 
Afterward he made the round of the camps with a special escort of
warrant officers and devoted Jack Tars . 

During this triumphant march over the island an incident occurred
which developed the slumbering instinct of the swamp "racer . " In a
second , as it were , and seemingly without cause , "Jeff" was seen to
move off at a tremendous pace at right angles with the line of
march . He was seen after he had run a few yards to make a great
jump , and then remain in his tracks . The pursuing party found him
actively engaged in demolishing a moccasin , which he had crushed by
jumping and landing with his feet upon its head and back . Hogs of
this particular kind are famous snake-killers--a big rattler or a
garter snake is all the same to them . They advance to the attack
with the greatest impetuosity , and a feast upon snake is the usual
reward of exceptional bravery . 

"Jeff" was a confirmed lover of good eating , and in time paid the
usual penalty for over-indulgence of his very piggish appetite . 
While the meal pennant was up , it was his habit to go from one
fore-castle mess to another , and to insist upon having rather more
than his share of the choice morsels from each . In a short time he
came to the repair shop very much the worse for wear , with an
impaired digestion and a cuticle that showed unmistakable evidence
of scurvy . For the first he was put upon short rations; for the
second , sand baths on shore were prescribed . Under this treatment
poor "Jeff" lost all his buoyancy of spirits and his habitual
friskiness , and became sad and dejected , but bore his troubles with
patience . He took to the sand baths at once , and gave forth many
disgruntled grunts when lifted out of them . 

The last time I saw "Jeff , " in 1862 , he was buried up to his ears
in the cool sands of the Roanoke Island shore , with eyes upturned
and looking like a very sad pig , but I fear none the wiser for his
offenses against the rights of a well-regulated digestion . 



THE IMPUDENT GUINEA-PIG

By Charles F . Lummis

No other creature is so absolutely graceful as a rattlesnake , and
none more gentle in intention . It is only against imposition that
he protests . Our forefathers had learned a not unworthy lesson from
their contact with nature in the New World when they put upon the
first flag of the colonies a rattlesnake , with the Latin legend , 
_Nemo me impune lacessit_--"No one wounds me with impunity . "
The flag of independence , however , only half told the real meaning
of its emblem--the warning , and not the self-restraint . There is a
device , to my notion , much more expressive: a rattlesnake rampant , 
with the Spanish motto , _Ni huyes ni persigues_--"Thou needst
not flee , but thou must not pursue . " Or , in other words , "I impose
upon no one; no one must impose upon me . " That is the real meaning
of the rattlesnake , as any one can testify who knows him well . 

I chanced one day to enter the market in Los Angeles , and was
surprised to find in one of the stalls a large collection of
rattlesnakes , mostly brought in from the Mojave desert . It was the
first time I had ever seen the crotalus sold in the stalls of a
city market; and as they went at the very reasonable figure of
fifty cents apiece , I promptly purchased a pair . The dealer , with a
noose of cord , lassoed the two I indicated , and after some
maneuvering got them stowed in two large cigar boxes , which he tied
up tightly . Reaching home safely with my new pets , I made them a
roomy cage with wire-screen in front and a sliding door on top , and
transferred them to it without much difficulty . One was a strong , 
handsome fellow five feet long and with fifteen rattles; the other
was about three feet in length and had an ordinary "string . "

The dealer told me they had eaten nothing in six months; and
fancying it must be about lunch-time with them , I went down-town , 
as soon as they were comfortably settled in the new quarters , to
get them food . A rattler , you know , will touch no dead meat , so I
had to seek some living bait . After ransacking the markets I found
at last one young cuye--the funny little South American , generally
miscalled among us the "guinea-pig . " It was about half grown--a
very proper-sized morsel for the larger snake . 

My friends rattled a little as I opened the slide on the top of
their cage , promptly closing it as I dropped the cuye in . But , to
my surprise , they paid no further attention to the newcomer , except
to appear very much bored by him; and , stranger yet , the guinea-pig
showed no sign whatever of fear . I have so often watched birds , 
rabbits , dogs , horses , cattle , and other animals--up to the
strongest and boldest--in presence of the rattlesnake , and have
always noted in them such unmistakable tokens of terror , that it
astonished me to find this pretty little white-and-tan creature so
utterly unconcerned . In dropping from the door he alighted squarely
upon the backs of the snakes , whereupon they drew away uneasily;
and he proceeded to look and sniff about , very much as you may have
seen a rabbit do . I stood by the cage a long time , expecting the
snakes to lose patience at last and enact a tragedy; but nothing
happened . The cuye scurried freely about the cage , generally
treading upon the irregular loops which covered most of the floor;
and the snakes neither rattled nor raised their heads at him . 

For fully a week the three lodged together harmoniously . Sometimes , 
on entering the room , I found the guinea-pig quietly reposing
inside the careless coil of one of his strange bedfellows . Several
times he was squatting upon them , and more than once sitting
squarely upon the head of one ! I began to wonder if there were
anything constitutionally wrong with the snakes . Whether they
deemed him too big or too foolish to be eaten , I have never known;
but , whatever the reason , they made no motion toward eating him . 
Unfortunately , he did not know how to return a favor . 

One afternoon I was writing at my desk , when a tremendous rattling
behind me caused me to jump up and go to the cage . The smaller
snake was up in arms , skirring his rattle violently , while the
larger one was twisting uneasily about , but not showing fight . And
what do you imagine ailed him ? Why , that miserable cuye was perched
upon him , coolly nibbling that beautiful rattle , of which only
three or four beads were left ! In my righteous indignation I tore
open the slide and "snaked out" the vandal as quickly as possible . 
Afterward it occurred to me to wonder that I had not been struck;
for nothing so alarms and angers a crotalus as a swift motion like
that with which I had removed the cuye . The rattles never grew
again , and my best snake was spoiled . Why the cuye should have
cared to eat that mysterious husk which is so absolutely dry and
flavorless , I can explain only by adding that rats and mice have
the same perverted taste , and that it seems fairly a passion with
them . I have had many skins and rattles eaten up by them . 

Shortly after this episode one of our helpers in the office found a
nest of mice , and , mindful of my hungry snakes , I contrived to
catch one mouse alive . When the rattlers saw him through their
screen , they manifested such a lively interest as nothing had
aroused in them before . I cautiously opened the slide in the top of
the cage , held the mouse up by the tail , and let him drop . 

There was a fair illustration of the matchless agility of the
crotalus when he cares to be quick . The cage was just twelve inches
high in the clear; but before the falling mouse was halfway to the
bottom , there was an indescribable gray blur , and I knew that the
larger snake had hit him . I have improved numerous chances to study
the stroke of rattlesnake , which is the swiftest motion made by any
living creature; but that particular case , better than any other , 
gave me a conception of its actual rapidity . From years of
experience with the pneumatic shutter in photographing objects in
rapid motion , I should say the snake's head traversed that twelve
or fifteen inches in something like the three-hundredth part of a
second . 

The mouse fell upon the floor of the cage , and it never moved
again . The snake knew perfectly that it had done its work , for in
place of "recovering" for another stroke , as they invariably do
after a failure , he swallowed the mouse in the usual slow and
painful fashion , with as much apparent effort as a morsel four
times as large should have given him . 



HARD TO HIT

By Ernest Ingersoll

The spring weather we sometimes have in March reminds me , 
especially in the evening , of some days passed so high up in the
Rocky Mountains that the summer was left down in the valley . One
such spring-like evening we camped close to the timber-limit , and I
made my first trip into the region above , in which no trees grow . 
Having left the spruce-woods quickly behind , there came some stiff
climbing up ledges of broken rocks , standing , cliff-like , to bar
the way to the summit . These surmounted , the way was clear , for
from the northeast--the side I was on--this mountain presents a
smooth grassy slope to the very top; but the western side of the
range is a series of rocky precipices , seamed and shattered . This
is true of many mountains in Colorado . 

Just above the cliffs grew a number of dwarfed spruces , some of
them with trunks six inches in diameter , yet lying flat along the
ground , so that the gnarled and wind-pressed boughs were scarcely
knee-high . They stood so closely together , and were so stiff , that
I could not pass between them; but , on the other hand , they were
strong enough to bear my weight , so that I could walk over their
tops when it was inconvenient to go around . 

Some small brown sparrows , of two or three species , lived there , 
and they were very talkative . Sharp , metallic chirps were heard , 
also , as the blue snow-bird flitted about , showing the white
feathers on either side of its tail , in scudding from one
sheltering bush to another . Doubtless , careful search would have
discovered its home , snugly built of circularly laid grasses , and
tucked deeply into some cozy hollow beside the root of a spruce . 

My pace now became slow , for in the thin air of a place twelve
thousand feet above the sea-level , climbing is exhausting work . But
before long I came to the top , and stood on the verge of a crag
that showed the crumbling action of water and frost . Gaping cracks
seamed its face , and an enormous mass of fallen rock covered the
broad slope at its foot . The very moment I arrived there , I heard a
most lively squeaking going on , apparently just under the edge of
the cliff or in some of the cracks . It was an odd noise , something
between a bark and scream , and I could think of nothing but young
hawks as the authors of it . So I set at work to find the nest , but
my search was in vain , while the sharp squeaking seemed to multiply
and to come from a dozen different quarters . By this time I had
crawled down the rough face of the cliff , and had reached the heaps
of fallen rock . There I caught a glimpse of a little head with two
black eyes , like a prairie-dog's , peering out of a crevice , and I
was just in time to see him open his small jaws and say _"shink"
_--about as a rusty hinge would pronounce it . I whipped my
revolver out of my belt and fired , but the little fellow dodged the
bullet and was gone . Echoes rattled about among the rocks , wandered
up and down the canon , and hammered away at half a dozen stone
walls before ceasing entirely . But when they had died away , not
another sound was to be heard . Every little rascal had hid . 

So I sat down and waited . In about five minutes a tiny , timid
squeak broke the stillness , then a second a trifle louder , then one
away under my feet in some subterranean passage . Hardly daring to
breathe , I waited and watched . Finally the chorus became as loud as
before , and I caught sight of one of the singers only about ten
yards away , head and shoulders out of his hole , doubtless
commenting to his neighbor in no complimentary way upon the strange
intruder . Slowly lifting my pistol , I pulled the trigger . I was
sure he had not seen me , yet a chip of rock flying from where he
had stood was my only satisfaction; he had dodged again . 

I had seen enough , however , to know that the noisy colony was a
community of Little Chief hares ( _Lagomys princeps , _ as they
are named in the textbooks ) , or "conies , " as the silver miners call
them . They are related to the woodchucks as well as to the hare , 
and they live wholly at or above timber-line , burrowing among the
fallen and decomposing rocks which crown the summits of all the
mountains . Not every peak , by any means , harbors conies; on the
contrary , they are rather uncommon , and are so difficult to shoot
that their skins are rare in museums , and their ways are little
known to naturalists . During the middle of the day they are asleep
and quiet; but in the evening and all night when the moon shines
they leave their rocky retreats and forage in the neighboring
meadows , meeting the yellow-footed marmot and other neighbors . 
About the only enemies they have , I fancy , are the rattlesnake and
weasel , excepting when a wild-cat may pounce upon one , or an owl
swoop down and snatch up some rambler . In the cold season , of
course , their burrows are deep in snow; but then the little fellows
are taking their long winter sleep , and neither know nor care what
the weather may be . 

An Indian will eat a cony , --if he can catch it . He likes to use its
fur , also , for braiding his locks into those long plaits which
delight his soul; but the lively little rodents are pretty safe
from all human foes , even one with a Colt's revolver ! 



THAT SLY OLD WOODCHUCK

By William O . Stoddard

"Deah me ! Dey's jes' one moah row ob taters . I's hoein' de bes' I
know . "

Julius leaned on his hoe for a moment . His bright black face was
turned a little anxiously toward the front fence . Over in the road
beyond that there stood a white boy , of about his own size , and he
was calling:

"Quib ! Quib ! Come here ! "

"Dar he goes ! " said Julius . "Dey'e got him agin . He's de bes' dog
for woodchucks , he is ! An' I can't go 'long . Tell you wot , dough , 
if I'd ha' t'ought he'd run away 'fore I'd hoed dese taters , I'd
nebber hab gibben him dat big bone . De rascal ! He's jes' hid it
away , somewhar , down 'mong de cabbages . "

That was what Quib had done with his precious bone; but now his
little , lean , yellow legs were carrying him rapidly down the road , 
with half a dozen very noisy boys behind him . 

"Pete ! Pete Corry ! Where was it you saw that woodchuck ? "

"Finest woodchuck you ever saw in all your life ! " was Pete's reply . 

"He'll get away from us ! "

"No , he won't . Abe Selover is watching for him . That woodchuck is
in the stone-heap at the corner of old Hamburger's pasture-lot . "

Quib must have understood what Mart Penniman said , for he did not
halt for one second till he reached the bars that led into that
very field . It was more than a quarter of a mile from the
potato-patch , but Quib had barked all the way--probably out of
respect for the size and importance of the coming woodchuck . 

Mart Penniman and Abe Selover had started their great "game" on the
way home from driving their cows . They had raced him across the
pasture and along the fence , into the stone-heap , and then Abe had
staid to keep watch while Mart went after Julius Davis's dog . That
meant also , of course , as large a crowd of boys as he could pick up
in going and coming . 

It was a sad thing for Julius that his mother had set him at the
potato-patch , and that Quib had broken his contract with the bone . 

Quib was not usually so treacherous , but he happened to be on
friendly terms with every boy of that hunting-party . 

They had all helped him chase woodchucks at one time or another , 
and he had great confidence in them , but that was nothing at all to
their confidence in him . 

The pasture bars did not stop a single one of the
woodchuck-hunters . All the boys went over while Quib was wriggling
under , through a hole he knew , and there , almost right before them
was the stone-heap . It was quite a large one , and it was thickly
overgrown with wild raspberry vines . 

"Abe--is he there ? "

"He didn't get away , did he ? "

"Are you sure he is in there ? "

"Quib ! Quib ! " shouted Abe . "Woodchucks ! Quib , woodchucks ! Right in
here . Find 'em ! "

Quib was dancing around in a quiver of noisy excitement , for he had
caught a sniff of something under the first bush he sprang into . 

How he did bark and yelp and scratch , for about a minute ! 

"Poys ! Poys ! Vat is all dis ? Vat you want vis mein stone-heap , eh ? "

It was old Hamburger himself climbing the fence , and he looked
longer and leaner just then , and had more pipe in his mouth , than
the boys thought they had ever seen before . 

"The finest woodchuck you ever saw , Mr . Hamburger , " began Cole
Thomas , by way of an apology . 

"Vootchuck ! Dat's it ! Ant so you puts a tog into mein stone-heap , 
and you steps onto mein grass , ant you knock ober all mein
beautiful mullein-stalks and mein thistles and mein scoke-veeds ! "

Puff ! puff ! came the great clouds of smoke from the grim lips of
the old German , but it struck Cole Thomas that Mr . Hamburger
himself was on the watch for that woodchuck . 

Bow-wow-yow-yelp ! and Mart shouted:

"There he goes ! "

"Hi ! We'll get him ! " screamed Abe . 

"Take him , Quib ! Take him ! "

Quib had started a woodchuck . 

There was never a stone-heap piled up that had room in it for both
a dog and a woodchuck . 

Mr . Hamburger took the pipe out of his mouth , which was a thing
nobody could remember ever having seen him do . 

"Dose poys ! Dat vootchuck ! De tog is a goot von . Dey vill preak
dare little necks . Joost see how dey run ! But de tog is de pest
runner of dem poys , egsept de vootchuck . "

Mr . Hamburger did not run . Nobody had ever seen him do any such
thing as that . 

But he walked on across the pasture-lot , toward the deep ravine
that cut through the side of the hill to the valley . 

All that time poor Julius had been hoeing away desperately upon the
last row of his mother's potatoes , and she had been smiling at him
from the window . She was anxious he should get through , for she
meant to send him to the village for a quarter of a pound of tea . 

It was just as Julius reached the last hill that the baby cried , 
and when Mrs . Davis returned to the window to say something about
the store and the kind of tea she wanted , all she could see of
Julius was the hoe lying beside that last hill . 

"Ef he hasn't finished dem taters and run away ! "

She would have been proud of him if she could have seen how
wonderfully fast he did run away , down the road he had seen Quib
and the other hunters . 

"Dey's into de lot ! " he exclaimed , when he came to the bars . "Dar's
Pete Corry's ole straw hat lyin' by de stone-heap . Mus' hab been
somefin' won'erful , or he'd nebber forgot his hat . "

That was an old woodchuck , of course , or he would not have been so
large , and it may be he knew those boys as well as Quib did . If
not , it was his own fault , for every one of them had chased him
before , and so had Quib . 

He knew every inch of that pasture-lot , and he knew the shortest
way to the head of the deep ravine . 

"Boys ! " shouted Abe Selover , with all the breath he had . "Boys ! 
He's going for the glen ! Now we've got him ! "

The ravine was a rocky and wonderful place , and all the boys were
perfectly familiar with it , and considered it the grandest
play-house in the world , or , at least , in the vicinity of the
village . If Quib once got the woodchuck penned up among those
rocks , they could play hide-and-seek for him till they should find
him . 

Some city people that had a picnic there once had called it a
"glen , " and the name had stuck to it , mainly because it was
shorter than any other the boys could think of; and , besides
that , the schoolmaster of the district two years before ( who
didn't suit the trustees ) had been named Glenn , and so the word
must have been all right . 

Some of the boys were near enough to see the woodchuck make for the
two maples at the head of the ravine , and Bob Hicks tumbled over
Andy Thompson while he was shouting:

"Catch him , Quib ! "

After they got past those two maple trees there was no more fast
running to be done . 

Down , down , deeper and rockier and rougher every rod of it , the
rugged chasm opened ahead of them , and it was necessary for the
boys to mind their steps . It was a place where a woodchuck or a
small dog could get around a good deal faster than any boy , but
they all followed Quib in a way that would have scared their
mothers if they had been there . 

"It's grand fun ! " said Mart Penniman . "Finest woodchuck you ever
saw ! "

"Come on , boys ! " shouted Abe Selover , away ahead . "We'll get him , 
this time . "

Abe had a way of being just the next boy behind the dog in any kind
of chase , and they all clambered after him in hot haste . 

On went Quib , and even Abe Selover could not see him more than half
the time , for he had an immense deal of dodging to do , in and out
among the rocks and trees , and it was dreadfully shady at the
bottom of that ravine . 

The walls of rock , where Abe was , rose more than sixty feet high on
either side , and the glen was only a few rods wide at the widest
place . 

"He's holed him ! He's holed him ! Come on ! we've got him , now ! "

Quib was scratching and yelping like an insane dog at the bottom of
what looked like a great crack between two rocks , in the left-hand
side of the glen as you went down . The crack was only an inch or so
wide at the bottom , and twisted a good deal as it went up , for the
rock was of the kind known as "pudding-stone . " There was a hole , 
just there , large enough for a woodchuck , but too small for a dog . 

"Dig , boys ! Dig ! "

"Dig yourself , " said Pete Corry . "Who's going to dig a rock , I'd
like to know ? "

"Let Quib in , anyhow . He'll drive him out . "

Abe was prying at that hole with a dead branch of a tree , and , 
almost while he was speaking , a great piece of the loose
pudding-stone fell off and came thumping down at his feet . 

"A cave , boys , a cave ! Just look in ! "

Quib did not wait for anybody to look in , but bounded through the
opening with a shrill yelp , and Abe Selover squeezed after him . 

Pete Corry felt a little nervous when he saw how dark it was , but
he followed Abe; and the other boys came on as fast as the width of
the hole would let them . 

That is , they crept through , one boy at a time . 

What surprised them was , that the moment they had crawled through
that hole they could stand up straight . 

"Where's the woodchuck ? " asked Bob Hicks . 

"Woodchuck ? Why , boys , this is a regular cave , " replied Abe . 

"Quib's in there , somewhere , " said Mart Penniman . "Just hear him
yelp ! "

"Hold on , " said Cole Thomas--"there's more light coming in . We
shall be able to see , in a minute . "

The fact was that it took a little time for their eyes to get
accustomed to the small amount of light there was in that cave . 

The cave itself was not very large . 

It grew wider for about twenty feet from the hole they came in by , 
and the floor , which was covered with bits of rock , sloped upward
like the roof of a house , only not quite so abruptly . 

In the middle it was more than a rod wide . Then it grew narrower , 
and steeper , and darker with every step . But they knew about where
the upper end must be , for they could hear Quib barking there . 

"It's dark enough , " said Andy . 

"Come on , boys ! " shouted Abe Selover . "We'll have that woodchuck
this time . He's in this cave , somewhere . "

They were not very much afraid to keep a little way behind Abe
Selover , and in a few minutes they heard him say:

"Quib ! Is he there ? Have you got him ? "

Quib barked and whined , and the sound seemed to come from away
above them . 

"Come on , boys ! I can see a streak of light . It's like climbing up
an old chimney . Quib's almost on him . "

All that time , while they were groping through that cave , Julius
Davis was looking around the pasture-lot after them . 

He would have been glad of a small glimpse of Quib , but all he had
found as yet was Mr . Hamburger , who was standing under an old
butternut-tree and looking down at a round , hollow place in the
ground . 

He was smoking very hard . 

"Hab you seen my dog ? " asked Julius . 

"Hold shtill , poy ! Joost you vait . Hi ! Dere goes dose vootshuck ! "

"Dat's so . He's coming right up out ob de hole , and dar ain't no
dog to foller him ! "

Away went the woodchuck , and Julius gave him up for lost; but Mr . 
Hamburger smoked harder than ever and looked down at the hole . 

"Hark ! Hear dem ? It is de tog . Pless mein eyes , if dey didn't chase
dose vootshuck right oonder mein pasture-lot ! "

Julius could hear Quib bark now , away down there in the ground , and
he could not stand still on any one side of that hollow . So he
danced up and down on every side of it . 

One minute , --two , three minutes , --it was a dreadfully long time , 
--and then it was the voice of Abe Selover mixed with a long yelp
from Quib . 

"Come on , boys ! I've shoved him through . I'm going right up after
him . Nothing to pull away but some sods . "

"Dat's de tog ! " exclaimed Mr . Hamburger . "Keep shtill , black poy ! 
De rest of dose vootshucks is coming . Keep shtill . "

Nothing but some sods to pull away , to make that hole large enough , 
and then Abe Selover's curly head popped out , and the rest of him
followed , grimy and dirty , but in a great fever of excitement and
fun . 

After him climbed the other boys , one by one . 

"Mr . Hamburger , did you see where that woodchuck went to ? "

"De vootshuck ? I don't know him . But de black poy haf run after de
tog , ant he vas run so fast as nefer you saw . Vare you leetle
vootshucks coom from , eh ? You climb oonder mein pasture ? "

"No use , Abe , " said Mart Penniman . "We've missed that woodchuck
this time . "

"We've found the cave , though , " said Pete Corry . "It's through that
he got away from us so many times . "

"I dell you vat , " said Mr . Hamburger; "de nex' time you leetle
vootshucks vant to chase dat oder vootshuck , you put a pag ofer
dese hole . Den you shace him round among de rocks , and you will
catch de tog ant de vootshuck into de same pag . "

"That's what we'll do , " said Abe Selover . "But not to-day , boys . He
was the finest woodchuck I ever saw , but we've missed him this
time . "

