Once upon a time a king and a queen gave a magnificent party in honor of
the christening of their new-born son, Prince Rolandor. To this party
the royal parents took good care to invite every single fairy in
Fairyland, for they knew very well the unhappy consequences of
forgetting to invite fairies to christenings. When all the invitations
had been sent out, the Queen went down to the kitchen to superintend the
cooking of the master-dainty of the feast, a huge strawberry-tart.

The morning on which the grand ceremony was to take place arrived. At
half-past ten the Court Astrologer, who was master of ceremonies, gave
the order to form in line; and at ten minutes to eleven the splendid
procession started for the church. The road was lined with the King's
vassals shouting, "Hurrah, hurrah!" Countless little elves with gauzy
wings watched from the branches of the trees; and the great cathedral
bells went clang, bang, clang, as merrily as could be.

Just behind the royal body-guard came the King's gold-and-diamond coach
shining in the sunlight of June, with the King and the Queen in it on
one side and the Court Astrologer and the fairy Titania, prospective
godparents of the little Prince, on the other. The Prince himself,
swathed in a wonderful silk mantle edged with pearls and turquoises,
slept in the Astrologer's arms.

The procession entered the church, where the venerable Lord Archbishop,
surrounded by a magnificent choir, was awaiting its coming. A hush went
over the great assembly as the parents and the godparents advanced to
the flower-decked font, and the silence lasted until His Eminence had
sprinkled the Prince and given him the name of Rolandor. Then the bells
rang again, the organ roared so that the windows shook in their
casements, and the choristers sang like birds on a summer afternoon.

The christening over, the procession went back to the castle, past the
waiting rows of bystanders, not one of whom had changed his place or
gone away, so superb had been the spectacle.

The christening banquet was laid in the great hall of the castle, and,
thanks to the Court Astrologer, things went off beautifully. It was the
only large banquet ever known in the history of the world where courses
were served all at one time, and while one person was finishing an ice,
another was not beginning with the soup. Nor was the menu mixed, which
happens so frequently to-day that you are apt to have soup, ice, cake,
roast, soup, and a roast again. No, from soup to ice the banquet was a
huge success; but, alas, disaster came with the strawberry-tart.

As the Queen was chatting with the Lord Chancellor of the Enchanted
Islands, she happened to notice--for like a good hostess she had been
keeping an eye to the comfort of her guests--that nobody on the
right-hand side of the hall had been served with strawberry-tart. Almost
at the same moment, the chief cook, looking rather pale and worried,
bustled through the throng and whispered in her ear, "Your Majesty, the
strawberry-tart has given out!
The Queen turned pale. At length she managed to ask in a weak voice,
"Have you plenty of other pastries?
"Yes, Your Majesty," replied the cook.

"Then let them be served at once.
The cook withdrew, and the Queen, though somewhat shaken, took up the
conversation again. Ten minutes passed, and she was beginning to forget
her start, when a voice, rising clear and rasping over the hubbub of the
hall, said suddenly, "Where's my piece of strawberry-tart?
Everybody turned toward the speaker, an elderly fairy from the Kingdom
of the Black Mountains, named Malvolia. She stood up in her place, her
arms akimbo, glowering at her plate, on which an attendant had just
deposited a small chocolate eclair.

"Where's my piece of strawberry-tart?" she repeated.

The Queen rose. "I am very sorry, Madam Malvolia," said she in her
sweetest voice, "but the strawberry-tart has given out.
"Hoity-toity," answered Malvolia rudely; "you mean that you only baked
enough for your own personal friends.
At this several guests cried, "Sh! Sh!" and the King began to look
worried.

"We will send for some at once," announced His Majesty.

"Oh yes,--strawberry-tart baked by the Queen's own hands for her own
dear friends," said Malvolia sneeringly; "but for me, a fairy of age and
distinction, an ordinary, low baker's eclair. The Kingdom of the Black
Mountains has been deliberately insulted in my person!
"No, no, no, no!" cried the King and the Queen. "We assure you, madam,
that it was a simple mischance.
"Pish and tush!" replied Malvolia, who, like a great many people,
secretly enjoyed feeling herself aggrieved. "I consider the affair an
affront, a deliberate affront. And you shall pay dear for this
humiliation," she screamed, quickly losing control of her temper. "Every
time the Prince sneezes something shall change until--
At this very moment, alas, a northeast wind blew gustily through the
open windows of the hall, shaking the tapestries from the walls, and
carrying away the last of Malvolia's sentence. The angry fairy turned
herself into a great black raven and flew, cawing hoarsely, over the
heads of the banqueters and out of the window with the wind.

A baby's cry was heard, and the King and the Queen rushed panic-stricken
to where their little son lay in his cradle on a raised platform at the
head of the hall. The little Prince's fat, pink face was twisted into
dreadful lines; he opened his mouth wide several times and half closed
it again; then, opening it wider than ever, he sneezed a terrible
sneeze.

There came a loud clap of thunder. When the confusion was over, the
Court Astrologer was found to have turned into an eight-day clock, with
a sun, moon, and stars arrangement, a planetary indicator, and a
calendar calculated for two thousand years. The banquet ended rather
gloomily, although the gifts of the other fairies, such as health,
wealth, and beauty, managed to make everyone a little more cheerful.

When the guests were gone, the King and Queen sent for Doctor Pill, the
court physician, to consult him in regard to the measures which ought to
be taken to prevent the Prince's sneezing. As for the poor Court
Astrologer, he was hung up in the sacristy of the cathedral, and every
eight days his wife wound him up, with tears.

"What shall we do, doctor?" asked the King rather mournfully.

"The Prince must be preserved from the things which cause sneezing,said the doctor sagely.

"Such as draughts?" suggested the King.

"Draughts, head-colds, snuff, and pepper," answered the leech. "Let his
little highness be put into a special suite of rooms; admit no person to
them until he has been examined for head-cold, and has put on germ-proof
garments; and as his little highness grows older, forbid the use of
pepper in his food. Better still, if Your Majesty has a castle in the
mountains, let the Prince be taken there for the sake of the purer air.
"There is the tower on the Golden Mountain," said the King.

At this the Queen began to weep again, for she, quite naturally, did not
wish to part with her child.

"But, my dear, we can't have him sneezing, and things changing all the
time," said the King.

"I beg Your Majesty to consider the danger of a head-cold," put in the
doctor.

"Yes, think of the danger of a head-cold," echoed the King, who saw
clearer than the Queen the chaos that might result if the Prince was
attacked by a prolonged fit of sneezing. "People with head-colds may
sneeze ten or fifteen times a day.
"Or fifty," said the doctor.

"Or fifty," echoed the King again, shaking his head, for he was torn
between paternal love and kingly duty. "Imagine fifty enchantments in a
day! By eventide the whole kingdom would be upset, undone, and the
people plotting a revolution.
"The tower on the Golden Mountain is in a fine healthful locality," said
the doctor, "and the Prince could be brought up as happily there as in
the palace.
So at length the Queen consented. In a few days the little Prince, who
had not sneezed a second time, was removed to the tower on the Golden
Mountain. His room, designed by Doctor Pill, was completely protected
from draughts, and every breath of air that entered it was
tri-bi-sterilized. Mrs. Pill, who had been a hospital nurse, took care
of him. Three times a week, on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, his
royal parents rode out to the tower, and after putting on germ-proof
garments, were admitted to the nursery of their infant son.

And so the years went by. Nobody was found able to break Malvolia's
spell, and the clue to its undoing had been carried away by the wind.
Malvolia herself had disappeared.

The Prince became a handsome little boy. Accomplished teachers taught
him history, music, drawing, dancing, and all the other things that a
prince ought to know. But of real life he knew almost nothing at all.

His most faithful friend during these lonely years was a French poodle,
who spoke both French and English exceedingly well. Of course, he had a
marked canine accent, rather growling his g's and howling the aw's and
the ow's, but his words were well chosen and his vocabulary extensive.
Never was seen a more friendly, wise, and devoted animal.

When the King decided to have him sent away for a while, for he feared
that his son was getting a touch of Poldo's barky manner of speaking,
from too close an association, the little Prince became really ill from
grief, and the King was forced to alter his decision.

During his imprisonment in the tower, in spite of all precautions, the
Prince sneezed three times. At the first sneeze, all the dogs in the
kingdom except Poldo changed into cats, and all the cats into dogs.
Though this was not a serious trouble, the change was certainly
inconvenient. All the dog-cats came out meowing at people as the dogs
used to bark at them, and they chased people down the street; the
cat-dogs, on the other hand, stayed in the kitchen under the stove, and
watched for mice in the pantry. Great St. Bernards might be seen licking
their paws and rubbing them over their foreheads, and fat, old
cat-lap-dogs used to try to purr.

At the second sneeze, all the elderly gentlemen over seventy changed
into elm trees, a proceeding that caused a terrible lot of trouble.

At the third sneeze, all the people in the pictures at the Art Museum
became alive, and for a week the soldiers of the royal guard spent most
of their time rescuing poor, bewildered fauns, satyrs, nymphs, Roman
senators, and long dead celebrities and historical personages from the
worst destitution. The King finally had to build a special castle for
them.

As the Prince's twenty-first birthday drew near, he began to feel very
sad at the idea of having to stay shut up in the tower all his life.
Though he was a very brave and very manly young man, he lay down on his
couch and wept in sorrow.

Suddenly, standing with his forepaws on the coverlet, "Why do you weep,
dear master?" said the little dog.

"At my fate," replied the poor Prince. "I cannot bear to think that I
may have to spend all my days in this tower, and never see the great
wide world.
The poodle was silent for a few minutes. At length he said, "Dear Prince
Rolandor, do not give up hope. Have you ever thought of consulting my
old master, the Giant of the North Pole? He has a large chest in his
palace full of secrets which the winds have overheard, and perhaps the
key to Malvolia's spell is among them. If you will have a warm fur coat
and four fur boots made for me, I will go to the Giant and ask him.
The Prince gave his consent, and on the next day the royal tailor made
the poodle a magnificent sealskin coat and four splendid fur-lined
boots. Then the King wished him good speed, the Queen cried over him,
and the Prince, who could see from his high tower every corner of the
kingdom, watched him till he disappeared over the hills and far away.

Straight north the poodle ran. Soon he had left the fertile plains
behind him, and entered great, black pine forests where never a road was
to be seen. The cold wind howled through the trees, and at night the
brilliant stars sparkled over the dark and waving branches. Hungry
wolves and savage bears often pursued him, but somehow he always managed
to escape them all. At the end of the forest he found the frozen ocean
lit by the shuddering light of the aurora, flashing in a great fan from
east to west. Past white-tusked walruses and sleepy penguins he flew,
till on the eleventh day he saw the green, icy pinnacles of the Giant's
palace against the waving curtain of the Polar lights. On the evening of
the twelfth day he entered the castle.

The Giant of the North Pole was a tall, strong, yellow-haired fellow
wearing a crown of ice and a great sweeping mantle made from the white
fur of the polar bear. His servants were the Gusts,--strange, supple,
shadowy creatures moving quickly to and fro,--and his courtiers were
the whirlwinds and the storms. The Giant's wife sat by his side; she had
dark hair and eyes of icy, burning blue.

"Welcome, little Poldo," said the Giant; and his voice sounded like the
wind in the treetops; "what seek you here?
"I seek some words of the Fairy Malvolia which were carried away by the
northeast wind at Prince Rolandor's christening," replied the poodle.

"Whew, oo-oo," whistled the Giant of the North Pole. "If I have them,
the words are yours.
He summoned two Gusts to bring forth the chest of secrets. It was made
of black stone; and edged with diamonds of ice. In it were stored all
the mysteries which the wind had ever overheard; there were secrets,
confessions, vows, merry laughs, and simple words. And sure enough, in
the corner of the chest lay the rest of Malvolia's spell--a row of
little, old-fashioned, dusty words; the words: "Until he finds someone
brave enough to marry him.
So the good poodle learned the words by heart, thanked the Giant, and
hurried home with the message. When he came to the King's palace, he
ran, barking with joy, right into the King's own room. There he saw the
unhappy parents.

"Have you found the last of the sentence?" cried the Queen.

"Yes," said Poldo. "The spell will end when the prince marries.
That very evening the King and the Queen sent forth ambassadors to ask
for the hand of the loveliest princess of all Fairyland, Princess Adatha
of the Adamant Mountains. But so afraid was Adatha of being turned into
something else, that she refused the offer.

The King and the Queen then made a request for the hand of Princess
Alicia of the Crystal Lakes. But Alicia also was afraid of being turned
into something else, and she too refused the alliance. So did the
Princess of the Golden Coasts, the Princess of the Seven Cities, and
many others. Finally the only princess left in all Fairyland was a
princess who herself lay under an enchantment. A jealous witch had
turned her golden hair bright blue, and given her a nose a foot long.
This unhappy maiden was the only princess willing to accept poor
Rolandor.

The wedding day arrived. The Prince, though perhaps a little pale from
his confined life, looked very handsome, and led his ugly bride to the
altar like a man. Just exactly as the marriage ceremony was half over, a
spasm contorted the muscles of the Prince's face; the poor young man
felt strongly inclined to sneeze. Though he could be seen making heroic
efforts to control the impulse, the audience got very nervous and
panicky.

All was in vain! The Prince sneezed, "Ker choo!" A terrific clap of
thunder rent the air, and everybody looked about to see what had
happened.

The effect of the sneeze was an odd one. As it had occurred exactly at
the moment when the Prince was half-married, the spell had reacted upon
itself. "Just like a kick from a gun," Dr. Pill said next day.

The cats became dogs again, and the dogs became cats; the elm trees
became cross, elderly gentlemen looking for their families; the poor,
excited Roman senators, fauns, nymphs, satyrs, celebrities and
historical personages, went back to their pictures; and to cap the
climax, the ugly bride became once more her sweet and lovely self.

While everybody was cheering, who should walk out of the sacristy but
the Court Astrologer! An instant later, he had fallen into the
affectionate arms of the faithful wife who had wound him up for
twenty-one years.

After the wedding reception, the Prince and his bride went on a
honeymoon to the Enchanted Islands. As for Poldo the poodle, he was
created Prime Minister and lived to a fine old age.



 MARIANNA

[Illustration: Young girl sitting on tree trunk; a small bird is perched
on her left hand; a small bottle is fastened to her belt.]


Once upon a time a wicked nobleman rose in rebellion against his
rightful king, and taking the royal forces by surprise, defeated them
and seized the kingdom. The dethroned King, who had been severely
wounded in battle, was cast in prison, where he soon died; but his
widow, the Queen, managed to escape from the palace before the usurper
could lay hands upon her.

Into the dark forest which lay behind the palace ran the Queen, holding
her baby daughter in her arms. It was winter time, and a heavy snow had
hidden the foot-paths and the roads. Presently the Queen realized that
she was lost. All afternoon, however, she trudged bravely on through the
silence and the cold, her heart sinking as mile after mile revealed no
sign of a house or a shelter.

But late in the afternoon, when the red shield of the sun could scarcely
be seen through the tangle of the wild wood-branches, she perceived a
light coming from a little grove of cedars by the shore of a frozen
lake. The Queen made her way toward this light, and discovered a little
thatched hut in the silent wood; it was the house of one of the dwarfs
of the forest. The dwarf took pity on the Queen, but his efforts were
vain, for the poor woman was so weak and exhausted that she died without
telling the dwarf anything about herself or the child she carried.

So the little dwarf, who was a good, kind old fellow, brought the little
girl up as if she were his own child. His brother, the dwarf of the
mountain, made her the prettiest red-leather shoes, and his cousins, the
dwarfs of the pines, made the little girl dresses from cloth woven on
fairy looms.

Now, on the night her mother brought her to the hut, the little girl was
wearing a golden heart-shaped locket, with a crown and the letter M upon
it in diamonds. So the dwarf called the little girl Marianna.

Seventeen years passed, and Marianna grew to be quite the loveliest lass
in all the world. Her hair was as black as the raven's wing, her eyes
were as blue as the midsummer sea, and her skin was fair as the petal of
a rose. One spring morning a little yellow bird flew into the cedar
grove, and gave the dwarf a letter which it held in its beak.

The dwarf read the letter, and said to Marianna, "Little Marianna, the
Emperor of the Elves has bidden me come to the great assembly of the
dwarfs which is to be held next year on the Golden Mountain. Alas, what
are we to do? I can not take you with me, dear child, for it is
forbidden on pain of death to bring mortals to the assembly, nor can I
leave you here in this lonely wood.
To this Marianna replied, "Do not fear, dear father. Give me but yon
crystal flask of the water of healing, and I shall go forth into the
world until it is time for you to return again. Perhaps I shall discover
somebody who can tell me the meaning of this locket, or the history of
my dear mother.
So the dwarf took his knotted staff, and went away over hill, over dale
to the Golden Mountain.

Then Marianna took the crystal flask of the water of healing, and walked
boldly out of the wood into the wide, wide world. It was the middle of
the spring, the ice and snow had all disappeared; the trees were putting
forth their leaves, and there were clusters of primroses by the
roadside. In the swaying, rustling heart of a great elm tree, a little
thrush was singing. Through cities and towns went lovely Marianna,
bringing good cheer to the helpless and the sick, and curing all who
came to her, rich and poor, with the wonderful water of healing. But
never did she find anybody who could tell her about the gold heart with
the diamond crown.

Now it came to pass that, as Marianna was one day walking through a
village in the heart of the Adamant Mountains, a ragged old woman
besought her with tears to come to a hamlet which stood at the head of a
high and dangerous path. Touched by the old woman's supplication,
Marianna followed her to the hamlet, and found in a wretched hut, lying
on a wretched bed, a beautiful young peasant girl dying of a fever. So
Marianna touched the girl with the water of healing, and in an instant
she became well and strong.

"Dear lady," said the peasant girl, pressing Marianna's hand to her
lips, "how sweet and kind thou art! Great is the debt I owe thee.
And as the girl poured out her thanks, Marianna heard a faint "chirp,
chirp," and looking down, beheld a little yellow bird crouching on the
hearthstone. Every now and then he hid his head under his wings and
cried unhappily. It was the yellow bird which had brought the message
from the Emperor of the Elves.

"Poor little bird," said Marianna, bending down and taking him up in her
hands, "why criest thou so mournfully? Who hath done thee harm?
But the bird uttered only a forlorn little cry, and hid his head again
under his wings.

"I found him on the rocks at the mountaintop yesterday," said the
mother. "Someone has wounded him. His wing is broken.
And she put the bird on the floor of the house and bade Marianna watch
how he fluttered trailing a wing in the dust. Again Marianna stooped,
and picking up the bird, touched the wounded wing with the water of
healing. Scarcely had she done so, when the yellow bird burst into a
joyous and golden song, and flying to the window, beat madly against the
panes. Then the peasant girl threw open the casement, and the yellow
bird flew out into the streaming sun.

"He is gone forever," said the peasant girl.

"Nay, he returns," said Marianna, gently, as the yellow bird flew back
and perched in the sheltering bower of Marianna's arms. Then,
accompanied by the peasant girl and the yellow bird, who flew singing
before her, Marianna went down the dangerous path to the high road in
the valley. When they reached the foot of the path, the peasant girl
cried:--

"Farewell, dear Marianna; may it some day be mine to repay thee!
Into the world again went Marianna, and with her went the yellow bird.
Presently she came to the fairest land which she had ever seen, a land
of rolling fields, little hills, and rivers bordered with pale willow
trees. This pleasant land, unknown to Marianna, was part of her father's
kingdom, and she was really its queen because her father had been the
last rightful king.

Now while Marianna had been in the forest, the wicked nobleman who had
stolen the kingdom from Marianna's father had died, leaving his brother
Garabin in charge of the kingdom and of the interests of his little son,
Prince Desire. This Garabin, however, taking advantage of the youth and
helplessness of his nephew, had himself assumed the state and airs of
king. For some time he had enjoyed undisturbed the possession of his
stolen throne; but as Desire grew taller and stronger every year,
Garabin began to fear the day when he would be compelled to resign in
favor of his nephew.

When the Prince reached his twentieth year, Garabin would certainly have
killed him openly had he dared; but, fearing the people, he resolved to
use secret methods, and bribed a cruel magician to afflict poor Desire
with a deadly and mysterious malady. Of this malady, Desire was slowly
dying, for no medicine could cure him or even give him any relief from
his constant pain. Every morning the cruel Garabin, in the hope of
finding his nephew dead, would go to the sick room; and you may be sure
that his wicked heart rejoiced when he found the Prince weaker and more
feverish.

Garabin had just returned from a visit to the Prince, who was rapidly
failing, when the Captain of the Castle Guard came to him with the news
that the wonderful Marianna had arrived in the kingdom. The King gave
orders that she be brought before him. So Marianna, walking between two
halberdiers and followed across the courtyard by crowds of curious
people, was led before the King. The little yellow bird sat on
Marianna's shoulder, and never did maiden appear lovelier or more
gentle.

Scarcely had Garabin set eyes on Marianna, when he caught sight of the
golden locket which she wore about her neck. Had he not been very old
and crafty, he would have started from his golden throne, for he knew
that the little golden heart set with diamonds had been one of the crown
jewels, and that therefore Marianna must be the missing Princess, and
rightful queen of the kingdom.

What was he to do? If he refused to let Marianna help the Prince, the
people might begin to suspect him, and start a revolution which would
thrust him from his throne; if he allowed Marianna to cure the Prince,
the Prince would certainly demand the kingdom on his twenty-first
birthday. What was he to do with Marianna, whose right to the throne was
superior even to his nephew's? Perplexed, and with fear in his heart,
the King sought the cruel magician who had cast the spell on Desire.

The magician lived in a gloomy tower, and had an enchanted black dog
that he fed with flaming coals. He listened to Garabin's story, stirring
a great cauldron all the while, and said, "Do not fear. I will destroy
both claimants to the throne at once.
Garabin rubbed his hands together with glee.

"To-night I shall cast a spell of sleep on Marianna, steal the crystal
flask, empty it of the water of healing, and refill it with a liquid
which will cause death within a night and a day. I shall then replace
the flask before Marianna wakes. You will allow Marianna to visit the
Prince; she will touch him with the deadly water, and the Prince will
die. You can then try Marianna for having killed the Prince, and condemn
her to be thrown from the precipice.
So pleased was Garabin with this horrid plot, that he could have danced
for joy. That very night, the magician filled Marianna's flask with the
poisonous water, and departed, thinking that nobody had noticed him. The
yellow bird, however, had seen everything, and followed the magician to
note where he hid the real water of healing.

The next morning Marianna was once more led before the King.

"Welcome, thrice welcome, lovely maiden," said Garabin with the most
dreadful hypocrisy. "I have long hoped that you would turn your
footsteps hither, for my poor dear nephew, Prince Desire, only son of
the late King, has been ill for some months of a malady no physician can
cure. Perhaps you can cure him with the water of healing.
Marianna replied that she would do her best to help the Prince; so the
Court Chamberlain gave her his arm, and escorted her to the Prince's
sick room. The King and many courtiers followed after him.

Desire lay in a great old-fashioned bed, his face flushed with fever. So
weak was the poor Prince, that he could scarcely lift his head to look
at his visitors. A great pity swept over Marianna's heart the instant
she saw him; as for Desire, he fell madly in love with Marianna at first
sight.

Now just as Marianna bent over the Prince to touch his forehead with the
water of healing, the yellow bird screamed and cried as madly as if he
were caught in a net. Marianna looked at the crystal flask. Nothing
seemed changed; the water within seemed as pure and diamond-like as
ever. She touched the Prince with the liquid. Alas, in a moment, so
terrible was the magician's poison that the Prince turned white as the
driven snow, and fell back on the pillows insensible. The lookers-on,
who had expected to see him spring up entirely cured, began to murmur,
and Marianna herself, terrified at what had happened, let fall the
flask, which broke into a thousand sparkling pieces.

Suddenly, Garabin cried at the top of his voice, "Seize the witch; she
has killed the Prince!
Presently there was a great confusion, rough hands seized Marianna, and
somebody caught the yellow bird. The Prince remained insensible on the
bed. At high noon, a trial was held, and since the doctors declared that
the Prince was dying, Marianna was condemned to be thrown from the
precipice. When somebody asked about the yellow bird, Garabin laughed,
and gave orders that the cook should wring its neck, and toss it to the
cat.

So Marianna was hurried to a dark prison-room and loaded with chains,
and the yellow bird was taken to the castle kitchen, and given to the
cook.

"Here, you wring its neck," said the cook to one of her helpers, "while
I go call the cat.
By great good fortune, the cook's helper was no other than the peasant
girl whom Marianna had saved. This girl recognized the yellow bird, and
instead of wringing its neck, let it fly out of the window. The yellow
bird flew to the window of the magician's room. The magician was in the
chamber, stirring the giant cauldron. The bird flew to the window of
Prince Desire's room, and saw that he was still insensible.

An hour later the castle-bell began to toll, and a dismal procession was
seen walking from the castle toward the frightful cliff from which
condemned witches and sorcerers were thrown. First came a troop of
soldiers, then Marianna, weighted down with chains, and last of all, a
little group in which were Garabin, the magician, and some of Garabin's
favorites.

The bell kept on sadly tolling and tolling. It roused the Prince from
his swoon, and with his last measure of strength, poor Desire dragged
himself to the window. The procession was then passing directly
underneath the window, and Desire's eyes met the eyes of Marianna.

"Stop! Stop!" cried the poor Prince, wildly; "I forbid--
An instant later he sank fainting to the floor. The procession went on.

Meanwhile the yellow bird had returned to the magician's chamber. It was
empty. With a joyous cry, the bird fluttered through the window-bars,
and discovered the phial into which the magician had poured the water of
healing. Clutching it in his claws, the bird flew once more to the
Prince's room. Desire still lay in a heap by the window, and over him
the yellow bird poured the contents of the phial.

The Prince sprang up, strong as a lion, seized his sword, and rushed
down to save Marianna. He arrived at the cliff just as the poor maiden
was about to be pushed off into space, and standing by her side, dared
anyone to lay hands upon her.

Garabin, seeing his precious plot miscarry, grew mad with rage.

"Seize them," cried he, "and toss them both over the precipice!
So the soldiers rushed at Marianna and the Prince, intending to carry
out their wicked master's orders. But even as they did so, there came a
flash of flame and the little dwarf, Marianna's foster-father, took his
place beside the lovers.

"Cruel King!" cried the dwarf sternly, "and thou, wicked and perfidious
magician, the hour of thy punishment is at hand.
Immediately the sky grew black, the lightning crashed, and there arose a
terrible, howling wind. Three giant gusts drove fiercely by, the first
one blowing the King and the magician head-over-heels over the
precipice, the second carrying away the soldiers, and the third the
rascally favorites. When the sky cleared, only the dwarf, Marianna, and
Desire were left of the company.

"Marianna," said the little dwarf, "the Emperor of the Elves has told me
all your history, and it is thanks to him that I have returned in time,
with the storm at my heels. You, Marianna, are the rightful Queen of
this country.
"Dear Queen," said the honest and gallant Desire, "let me be the first
of your subjects to salute you." And he knelt before her, and humbly
kissed her hand.

"Nay, Prince," said the young Queen, answering the adoring look in her
lover's eyes, "your father took the kingdom; if I were you, I should
take the Queen.
Which was a bit forward, of course, but nobody minded that very much in
those fairy times.

So Desire and Marianna were married, and lived happily ever after. The
yellow bird went to the wedding, and when the ceremony was over rose
singing into the air, and flew joyously home to the land of the Elves.



 THE LOST HALF-HOUR

Once upon a time there was an old widow woman who had three sons: the
first two were clever enough, but the third, Bobo by name, was little
better than a silly simpleton. All his mother's scoldings and
beatings--and she smacked the poor lad soundly a dozen times a day--did
him no good whatever.

Now it came to pass that one morning Princess Zenza, the ruler of the
land, happened to pass by the cottage and heard Bobo being given a
terrible tongue-lashing. Curious as to the cause of all the noise, the
Princess drew rein, and summoned Bobo's mother to come near. On hearing
her story, it occurred to the Princess that so silly a lad might amuse
her; so she gave the mother a golden florin, and took poor silly Bobo
with her to be her page.
[Illustration: In the background, a castle; in the middle ground, a boy
throwing a spiny object into a dragon's mouth; in the foreground, a
frightened girl.]
 Just as the dragon's mouth was at, its widest ....

You may be sure that it did not take the wise folk at the castle long to
discover how great a simpleton had arrived. Courtiers, footmen, lackeys,
turnspits even, were forever sending him off on ridiculous errands. Now
he would be sent to find a white craw's feather or a spray of yellow
bluebells; now he was ordered to look for a square wheel or a glass of
dry water. Everybody laughed at him and made fun of him--that is,
everybody except little Tilda, the kitchen-maid. When poor Bobo used to
return from some wild-goose chase, tired out, mud-stained, and often
enough wet to the skin, instead of laughing, little Tilda would find him
a glass of warm milk, hang his coat by the fire to dry, and tell him not
to be such a simpleton again. Thus, after a while, Bobo learned to ask
Tilda's advice before going away on a wild-goose chase, and was in this
way saved from many a jest.

Tilda, the kitchen-maid, was as sweet and pretty as she was kind and
good. She was said to be the daughter of an old crane who had come to
the castle one day, asking for help.

One pleasant mid-summer morning, when Bobo had been nearly a year at the
castle, Princess Zenza overslept half an hour and did not come down to
breakfast at the usual time. When she did get up, she found her court
waiting for her in the castle gardens. As she came down the steps of the
garden terrace, the Princess looked up at the castle clock to see how
late she was, and said to her lady in waiting,--

"Dear me--why, I've lost half an hour this morning!
At these words, Bobo, who was in attendance, pricked up his ears and
said,--

"Please, Your Highness, perhaps I can find it.
At this idea of finding a lost half-hour, the Princess laughed, and
found herself echoed by the company.

"Shall we send Bobo in search of the lost half-hour?" said the Princess
to the courtiers.

"Yes! Yes!" cried the courtiers. "Bobo shall look for the lost
half-hour.
"I'll give him a horse," said one. "I'll give him my old hat," said
another. "He can have an old sword I broke last week," said still
another.

And so, in less time than it takes to tell about it, poor simpleton Bobo
was made ready for his journey.

Before he left the castle, Bobo went down to the kitchen to say good-bye
to Tilda.

"What, off again?" said the little kitchen-maid. "Where are you going
now?
"The Princess has lost a half-hour and I am going in search of it," said
Bobo, proudly. And he told how the Princess herself had commanded him to
seek the half-hour through the world, and promised to bring Tilda a
splendid present when he returned.

The good kitchen-maid said little, for she feared lest some misadventure
overtake the poor simpleton; but when the chief cook was not looking,
she tucked a fresh currant-bun into Bobo's pocket, and wished him the
best of good fortune.

So Bobo went to the castle gate, and mounted his horse, which stumbled
and was blind in one eye.

"Good-bye, Bobo," cried the assembled courtiers, who were almost beside
themselves with laughter at the simpleton and his errand. "Don't fail to
bring back the lost half-hour!
So Bobo rode over the hills and far away. Every now and then he would
stop a passer-by and ask him if he had seen a lost half-hour.

The first person whom he thus questioned was an old man who was
wandering down the high road that leads from the Kingdom of the East to
the Kingdom of the West.

"A lost half-hour?" said the old man. "I've lost something much more
serious, I've lost my reputation. You have n't seen a lost reputation
lying about here, have you? It was very dignified and wore
tortoise-shell glasses.
But Bobo had to answer "No," and the old man wandered on again.

Another day the simpleton encountered a tall, dark, fierce kind of
fellow, who answered his polite question with a scream of rage.

"A half-hour," he roared. "No, I have n't seen your half-hour; I would
n't tell you if I had; what's more, I don't want to see it. I'm looking
for something I've lost myself. I've lost my temper. I lost it two years
ago at home, and have n't been able to find it anywhere since. Answer
me, you silly, have you seen a lost temper anywhere? It's about the size
of a large melon and has sharp little points.
On Bobo's answering "No," this dreadful person uttered so perfectly
awful a screech of rage, that Bobo's horse took fright and ran away with
him, and it was all that Bobo could do to rein him in three miles
farther down the road.

Still farther along, Bobo came to Zizz, the capital city of the Kingdom
of the Seven Brooks, and was taken before the King himself.

"A lost half-hour?" said the King. "No, I am quite sure it has not been
seen in my dominions. Would you mind asking, as you go through the
world, for news of my little daughter?" (Here the poor old King took out
a great green handkerchief and wiped his eyes.) "She was stolen by the
fairies on midsummer eve fifteen years ago. Find her, worthy Bobo, and
an immense reward will be yours.
So Bobo left the proud city of Zizz, and once again rode over the hills
and far away. But never a sign of the lost half-hour did he find,
although he asked thousands of people. His faithful white horse died,
and he continued his way on foot.

Three long years passed, and Bobo grew into a handsome lad, but remained
a simpleton still. Finally, after he had wandered all about Fairyland,
he came to the edge of the sea. Finding a ship moored in a little
harbor, Bobo asked the sailors if they had seen a lost half-hour.

"No," said the sailors, "but we are going to the Isles of Iron;
suppose you go with us. The lost half-hour may be there.
So Bobo went aboard the ship, and sailed out upon the dark sea.

For two days the weather was warm and clear, but on the third day, there
came a dreadful storm, and on the third night the vessel was driven far
off her course into the unknown ocean, and was wrecked upon a mysterious
island of rocks that shone in the night like wet matches. A great wave
swept the decks, and Bobo was borne away from his companions and carried
toward the shining land. Though pounded and battered by the foaming
waves, the simpleton at length managed to reach the beach, and took
refuge in a crevice of the cliff during the stormy night.

When the dawn broke, all sign of the ship had disappeared. Looking
about, Bobo found himself on a lovely island whose heart was a high
mountain mass hidden in the fog still sweeping in from the sea. There
was not a house, a road, or a path to be seen. Suddenly Bobo noticed a
strange little door in the bark of a great lonely tree, and, opening
this door, he discovered a little cupboard in which were a pair of
wooden shoes. Above the shoes was a card, saying simply,--

 PUT US ON.

So Bobo sat down on a stone by the foot of the tree, and put on the
wooden shoes, which fitted him very nicely. Now these shoes were magic
shoes, and Bobo had hardly stepped into them before they turned his feet
inland. So Bobo obediently let the shoes guide him. At corners the shoes
always turned in the right direction, and if Bobo forgot and blundered
on the wrong way, the shoes swiftly began to pinch his toes.

For two days Bobo walked inland toward the great mountain. A warm wind
blew the clouds and rain away, the sun shone sweet and clear. On the
morning of the third day, the simpleton entered a wood of tall silent
trees, and as that day was drawing to a close, turrets of a magnificent
castle rose far away over the leaves of the forest.

Bobo arrived at twilight.

He found himself in a beautiful garden, lying between the castle walls
and the rising slopes of a great mountain. Strange to say, not a living
creature was to be seen, and though there were lights in the castle,
there was not even a warder at the gate. Suddenly a great booming bell
struck seven o'clock; Bobo began to hear voices and sounds; and then,
before the humming of the bell had died away, a youth mounted on a
splendid black horse dashed at lightning speed out of the castle and
disappeared in the wood. An old man with a white beard, accompanied by
eleven young men, whom Bobo judged, from their expressions, to be
brothers,--stood by the gate to see the horseman ride away.

Plucking up courage, Bobo came forward, fell on his knee before the old
man, and told his story.

"Truly, you should thank the storm fairies," said the old man; "for had
you not been wrecked upon this island, never would you have discovered
the lost half-hour. I am Father Time himself, and these are my twelve
sons, the Hours. Every day, one after the other, they ride for an hour
round the whole wide world. Seven O'clock has just ridden forth. Yes,
you shall have the lost half-hour, but you must look after my sons'
horses for the space of a whole year.
To this Bobo willingly agreed. So Twelve O'Clock, who was the youngest
of the Hours, took him to the stables and showed him the little room in
the turret that he was to have. And thus for a year Bobo served Father
Time and his sons. He took such good care of the great black horses of
the Hours of the Night, and the white horses of the Hours of the Day,
that they were never more proud and strong, nor their coats smoother and
more gleaming.

When the year was up, Bobo again sought out Father Time.

"You have served faithfully and well," said Father Time. "Here is your
reward." And, with these words, he placed in Bobo's hands a small square
casket made of ebony. "The half-hour lies inside. Don't try to peek at it
or open the box until the right time has come. If you do, the half-hour
will flyaway and disappear forever.
"Farewell, Bobo," said kind young Twelve O'Clock, who had been the
simpleton's good friend. "I, too, have a gift for thee. Drink this cup
of water to the last drop." And the youth handed the simpleton a silver
cup full to the brim of clear shining water.

Now this water was the water of wisdom, and when Bobo had drunk it, he
was no longer a simpleton. And being no longer a simpleton, he
remembered the man who had lost his reputation, the man who had lost his
temper, and the king whose daughter had been stolen by the fairies. So
Bobo made so bold as to ask Father Time about them, for Father Time
knows everything that has happened in the whole wide world.

"Tell the first," said Father Time, "that his reputation has been broken
into a thousand pieces which have been picked up by his neighbors and
carried home. If he can persuade his neighbors to give them up, he
should be able to piece together a pretty good reputation again. As for
the man who lost his temper, tell him that it is to be found in the
grass by the roadside close by the spot where you first met him. As for
the missing daughter, she is the kitchen-maid in Princess Zenza's
palace, who is known as Tilda.
So Bobo thanked Father Time, and at noon, Twelve O'Clock placed him
behind him on the white charger, and hurried away. So fast they flew
that Bobo, who was holding the ebony casket close against his heart, was
in great danger of falling off. When they got to the seashore, the white
horse hesitated not an instant, but set foot upon the water, which bore
him up as if it had been, not water, but earth itself. Once arrived at
the shore of Fairyland, Twelve O'Clock stopped, wished Bobo good-speed,
and, rising in the air, disappeared into the glare of the sun. Bobo,
with the precious ebony casket in his hand, continued on in the
direction of Princess Zenza's palace.

On the second morning of his journey, he happened to see far ahead of
him on the highway the unfortunate aged man who had lost his reputation.
To him, therefore, Bobo repeated the counsel of Father Time, and sent
him hurrying home to his neighbors' houses. Of the man who had lost his
temper, Bobo found no sign. In the grass by the roadside, however, he
did find the lost temper--a queer sort of affair like a melon of fiery
red glass all stuck over with uneven spines and brittle thorns. Bobo,
with great goodness of heart, took along this extraordinary object, in
the hope of finding its angry possessor.

Farther on, the lad encountered Tilda's father, the unhappy King, and
delivered his message. The joy of the monarch knew no bounds, and Bobo,
the one-time simpleton, became on the spot Lord Bobo of the Sapphire
Hills, Marquis of the Mountains of the Moon, Prince of the Valley of
Golden Apples, and Lord Seneschal of the proud City of Zizz--in a word,
the greatest nobleman in all Fairyland. Then, having got together a
magnificent cohort of dukes, earls, and counts, all in splendid silks,
and soldiers in shining armor, the delighted King rode off to claim his
missing daughter from Princess Zenza.

So on they rode, the harnesses jingling, the bridle-bells ringing, and
the breastplates of the armed men shining in the sun. After a week of
almost constant progress (for the King was so anxious to see his beloved
daughter that he would hardly give the cavalcade time to rest), they
came to the frontiers of Princess Zenza's kingdom.

Strange to say, black mourning banners hung from the trees, and every
door in the first village which the travelers saw was likewise hung with
black streamers. On the steps of one of the cottages sat an old woman,
all alone and weeping with all her might.

"What is the matter, my good woman?" said the King.

"O sir," said the peasant woman, "evil days have fallen upon our unhappy
kingdom. Three days ago a terrible dragon alighted in the gardens of the
palace and sent word to Princess Zenza that if within three days she did
not provide him with someone brave enough to go home with him and cook
his meals and keep his cavern tidy, he would burn our fields with his
fiery breath. Yet who, I ask you, would be housekeeper for a dragon?
Suppose he did n't like the puddings you made for him--why, he might eat
you up! All would have been lost had not a brave little kitchen-maid
named Tilda volunteered to go. It is for her that we are mourning. At
two o'clock she is to be carried off by the dragon. It is almost two
now. Alas! Alas!
Hardly were the words out of her mouth, when the town bell struck twice,
solemnly and sadly.

"Quick! quick!" cried the King and Bobo in the same breath, "Let us
hurry to the castle. We may save her yet.
But they knew in their hearts that they were too late, and that poor
Tilda had given herself to the dragon. And so it proved. In spite of his
mad dash, Bobo, who had spurred on ahead, arrived exactly half an hour
late. The monstrous dragon with Tilda in his claws was just a little
smoky speck far down the southern sky. Princess Zenza and her court
stood by wringing their jeweled hands.

Suddenly Bobo thought of the half-hour. He had arrived half an hour
late, but he could have that half-hour back again! Things should be
exactly as they were half an hour before.

He opened the cover of the ebony box. Something like a winged white
flame escaped from it, and flew hissing through the air to the sun. As
for the sun itself, turning round like a cartwheel and hissing like ten
thousand rockets, it rolled back along the sky to the east. The hands of
the clocks, which marked half-past two, whirred back to two o'clock in a
twinkling. And, sure enough, there was brave little Tilda standing alone
in a great field waiting for the dragon to come and take her away.
Lumbering heavily along like a monstrous turtle, and snorting blue
smoke, the dragon was advancing toward her.

Bobo ran down into the field and stood beside Tilda, ready to defend her
to the end.

The dragon came nearer and nearer. Suddenly, angered by the sight of
Bobo and his drawn sword, he roared angrily, but continued to approach.
Bobo struck at him with his sword. The blade broke upon his steely
scales. The dragon roared again. Now just as the dragon's mouth was its
widest, Bobo who had been searching his pockets desperately, hurled into
it the lost temper.

There was a perfectly terrific bang! as if a million balloons had blown
up all at once. For the dragon had blown up. The lost temper had
finished him. Only one fragment of him, a tiny bit of a claw, was ever
found.

Everybody, you may be sure, began to cry "Hurrah" and "Hooray," and soon
they were firing off cannon and ringing all the bells. Then Tilda's
father took her in his arms, and told her that she was a real princess.
The Grand Cross of the Order of the Black Cat was conferred upon Bobo by
Princess Zenza, who also asked his pardon for having treated him so
shabbily. This Bobo gave readily. A wonderful fete was held. When the
rejoicings were over, Bobo and Tilda were married, and lived happily
together all their days.