
It was nearly time for Thanksgiving Day . The rosy apples and golden
pumpkins were ripe , and the farmers were bringing them into the
markets . 

[ 15: From  " Boston Collection of Kindergarten Stories , " J . L . 
Hammett Company . ]

One day when two little children , named John and Minnie , were going to
school , they saw the turkeys and chickens and pumpkins in the window
of a market , and they exclaimed ,  " Oh , Thanksgiving Day ! Oh , 
Thanksgiving Day ! " After school was over , they ran home to their
mother , and asked her when Thanksgiving Day would be . She told them in
about two weeks; then they began to talk about what they wanted for
dinner , and asked their mother a great many questions . She told them
she hoped they would have turkey and even the pumpkin pie they wanted
so much , but that Thanksgiving Day was not given us so that we might
have a good dinner , but that God had been a great many days and weeks
preparing for Thanksgiving . He had sent the sunshine and the rain and
caused the grains and fruits and vegetables to grow . And Thanksgiving
Day was for glad and happy thoughts about God , as well as for good
things to eat . 

Not long after , when John and Minnie were playing , John said to
Minnie ,  " I wish I could do something to tell God how glad I am about
Thanksgiving . "  " I wish so , too , " said Minnie . Just then some little
birds came flying down to the ground , and Minnie said:  " Oh , I know . " 
Then she told John , but they agreed to keep it a secret till the day
came . Now what do you think they did ? Well , I will tell you . 

They saved their pennies , and bought some corn , and early Thanksgiving
Day , before they had their dinner , they went out into the street near
their home , and scattered corn in a great many places . What for ? Why , 
for the birds . While they were doing it , John said ,  " I know , Minnie , 
why you thought of the birds: because they do not have any papas and
mammas after they are grown up to get a dinner for them on
Thanksgiving Day . "  " Yes , that is why , " said Minnie . 

By and by the birds came and found such a feast , and perhaps they knew
something about Thanksgiving Day and must have sung and chirped
happily all day . 




JOHN INGLEFIELD ' S THANKSGIVING

BY NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE . 

On the evening of Thanksgiving Day , John Inglefield , the blacksmith , 
sat in his elbow-chair among those who had been keeping festival at
his board . Being the central figure of the domestic circle , the fire
threw its strongest light on his massive and sturdy frame , reddening
his rough visage so that it looked like the head of an iron statue , 
all aglow , from his own forge , and with its features rudely fashioned
on his own anvil . At John Inglefield ' s right hand was an empty chair . 
The other places round the hearth were filled by the members of the
family , who all sat quietly , while , with a semblance of fantastic
merriment , their shadows danced on the wall behind them . One of the
group was John Inglefield ' s son , who had been bred at college , and was
now a student of theology at Andover . There was also a daughter of
sixteen , whom nobody could look at without thinking of a rosebud
almost blossomed . The only other person at the fireside was Robert
Moore , formerly an apprentice of the blacksmith , but now his
journeyman , and who seemed more like an own son of John Inglefield
than did the pale and slender student . 

Only these four had kept New England ' s festival beneath that roof . The
vacant chair at John Inglefield ' s right hand was in memory of his
wife , whom death had snatched from him since the previous
Thanksgiving . With a feeling that few would have looked for in his
rough nature , the bereaved husband had himself set the chair in its
place next his own; and often did his eye glance hitherward , as if he
deemed it possible that the cold grave might send back its tenant to
the cheerful fireside , at least for that one evening . Thus did he
cherish the grief that was dear to him . But there was another grief
which he would fain have torn from his heart; or , since that could
never be , have buried it too deep for others to behold , or for his own
remembrance . Within the past year another member of his household had
gone from him , but not to the grave . Yet they kept no vacant chair for
her . 

While John Inglefield and his family were sitting round the hearth
with the shadows dancing behind them on the wall , the outer door was
opened , and a light footstep came along the passage . The latch of the
inner door was lifted by some familiar hand , and a young girl came in , 
wearing a cloak and hood , which she took off and laid on the table
beneath the looking-glass . Then , after gazing a moment at the fireside
circle , she approached , and took the seat at John Inglefield ' s right
hand , as if it had been reserved on purpose for her . 

 " Here I am , at last , father , " said she .  " You ate your Thanksgiving
dinner without me , but I have come back to spend the evening with
you . " 

Yes , it was Prudence Inglefield . She wore the same neat and maidenly
attire which she had been accustomed to put on when the household work
was over for the day , and her hair was parted from her brow in the
simple and modest fashion that became her best of all . If her cheek
might otherwise have been pale , yet the glow of the fire suffused it
with a healthful bloom . If she had spent the many months of her
absence in guilt and infamy , yet they seemed to have left no traces on
her gentle aspect . She could not have looked less altered had she
merely stepped away from her father ' s fireside for half an hour , and
returned while the blaze was quivering upward from the same brands
that were burning at her departure . And to John Inglefield she was the
very image of his buried wife , such as he remembered on the first
Thanksgiving which they had passed under their own roof . Therefore , 
though naturally a stern and rugged man , he could not speak unkindly
to his sinful child , nor yet could he take her to his bosom . 

 " You are welcome home , Prudence , " said he , glancing sideways at her , 
and his voice faltered .  " Your mother would have rejoiced to see you , 
but she has been gone from us these four months . " 

 " I know , father , I know it , " replied Prudence quickly .  " And yet , when
I first came in , my eyes were so dazzled by the firelight that she
seemed to be sitting in this very chair ! " 

By this time , the other members of the family had begun to recover
from their surprise , and became sensible that it was no ghost from the
grave , nor vision of their vivid recollections , but Prudence , her own
self . Her brother was the next that greeted her . He advanced and held
out his hand affectionately , as a brother should; yet not entirely
like a brother , for , with all his kindness , he was still a clergyman
and speaking to a child of sin . 

 " Sister Prudence , " said he , earnestly ,  " I rejoice that a merciful
Providence hath turned your steps homeward in time for me to bid you a
last farewell . In a few weeks , sister , I am to sail as a missionary to
the far islands of the Pacific . There is not one of these beloved
faces that I shall ever hope to behold again on this earth . Oh , may I
see all of them--yours and all--beyond the grave ! " 

A shadow flitted across the girl ' s countenance . 

 " The grave is very dark , brother , " answered she , withdrawing her hand
somewhat hastily from his grasp .  " You must look your last at me by the
light of this fire . " 

While this was passing , the twin girl--the rosebud that had grown on
the same stem with the castaway--stood gazing at her sister , longing
to fling herself upon her bosom , so that the tendrils of their hearts
might intertwine again . At first she was restrained by mingled grief
and shame , and by a dread that Prudence was too much changed to
respond to her affection , or that her own purity would be felt as a
reproach by the lost one . But , as she listened to the familiar voice , 
while the face grew more and more familiar , she forgot everything save
that Prudence had come back . Springing forward she would have clasped
her in a close embrace . At that very instant , however , Prudence
started from her chair and held out both her hands with a warning
gesture . 

 " No , Mary , no , my sister , " cried she ,  " do not you touch me ! Your bosom
must not be pressed to mine ! " 

Mary shuddered and stood still , for she felt that something darker
than the grave was between Prudence and herself , though they seemed so
near each other in the light of their father ' s hearth , where they had
grown up together . Meanwhile Prudence threw her eyes around the room
in search of one who had not yet bidden her welcome . He had withdrawn
from his seat by the fireside and was standing near the door , with his
face averted so that his features could be discerned only by the
flickering shadow of the profile upon the wall . But Prudence called to
him in a cheerful and kindly tone:

 " Come , Robert , " said she ,  " won ' t you shake hands with your old
friend ? " 

Robert Moore held back for a moment , but affection struggled
powerfully and overcame his pride and resentment; he rushed toward
Prudence , seized her hand , and pressed it to his bosom . 

 " There , there , Robert , " said she , smiling sadly , as she withdrew her
hand ,  " you must not give me too warm a welcome . " 

And now , having exchanged greetings with each member of the family , 
Prudence again seated herself in the chair at John Inglefield ' s right
hand . She was naturally a girl of quick and tender sensibilities , 
gladsome in her general mood , but with a bewitching pathos interfused
among her merriest words and deeds . It was remarked of her , too , that
she had a faculty , even from childhood , of throwing her own feelings
like a spell over her companions . Such as she had been in her days of
innocence , so did she appear this evening . Her friends , in the
surprise and bewilderment of her return , almost forgot that she had
ever left them , or that she had forfeited any of her claims to their
affection . In the morning , perhaps , they might have looked at her with
altered eyes , but by the Thanksgiving fireside they felt only that
their own Prudence had come back to them , and were thankful . John
Inglefield ' s rough visage brightened with the glow of his heart , as it
grew warm and merry within him; once or twice , even , he laughed till
the room rang again , yet seemed startled by the echo of his own mirth . 
The brave young minister became as frolicsome as a schoolboy . Mary , 
too , the rosebud , forgot that her twin-blossom had ever been torn from
the stem and trampled in the dust . And as for Robert Moore , he gazed
at Prudence with the bashful earnestness of love new-born , while she , 
with sweet maiden coquetry , half smiled upon and half discouraged him . 

In short , it was one of those intervals when sorrow vanishes in its
own depth of shadow , and joy starts forth in transitory brightness . 
When the clock struck eight , Prudence poured out her father ' s
customary draught of herb tea , which had been steeping by the fireside
ever since twilight . 

 " God bless you , child , " said John Inglefield , as he took the cup from
her hand;  " you have made your old father happy again . But we miss your
mother sadly , Prudence , sadly . It seems as if she ought to be here
now . " 

 " Now , father , or never , " replied Prudence . 

It was now the hour for domestic worship . But while the family were
making preparations for this duty , they suddenly perceived that
Prudence had put on her cloak and hood , and was lifting the latch of
the door . 

 " Prudence , Prudence ! where are you going ? " cried they all with one
voice . 

As Prudence passed out of the door , she turned toward them and flung
back her hand with a gesture of farewell . But her face was so changed
that they hardly recognized it . Sin and evil passions glowed through
its comeliness , and wrought a horrible deformity; a smile gleamed in
her eyes , as of triumphant mockery , at their surprise and grief . 

 " Daughter , " cried John Inglefield , between wrath and sorrow ,  " stay and
be your father ' s blessing , or take his curse with you ! " 

For an instant Prudence lingered and looked back into the fire-lighted
room , while her countenance wore almost the expression as if she were
struggling with a fiend who had power to seize his victim even within
the hallowed precincts of her father ' s hearth . The fiend prevailed , 
and Prudence vanished into the outer darkness . When the family rushed
to the door , they could see nothing , but heard the sound of wheels
rattling over the frozen ground . 

That same night , among the painted beauties at the theatre of a
neighbouring city , there was one whose dissolute mirth seemed
inconsistent with any sympathy for pure affections , and for the joys
and griefs which are hallowed by them . Yet this was Prudence
Inglefield . Her visit to the Thanksgiving fireside was the realization
of one of those waking dreams in which the guilty soul will sometimes
stray back to its innocence . But Sin , alas ! is careful of her
bondslaves; they hear her voice , perhaps , at the holiest moment , and
are constrained to go whither she summons them . The same dark power
that drew Prudence Inglefield from her father ' s hearth--the same in
its nature , though heightened then to a dread necessity--would snatch
a guilty soul from the gate of heaven , and make its sin and its
punishment alike eternal . 




HOW OBADIAH BROUGHT ABOUT A THANKSGIVING[16]

BY EMILY HEWITT LELAND . 

 The Waddle family had very bad luck on their farm in the
 West . And they certainly were homesick ! But Obadiah and his
 uncle , between them , found means to mend matters . 


That an innocent and helpless baby should be named Obadiah Waddle was
an outrage which the infant unceasingly resented from the time he got
old enough to realize the awful gulf that lay between his name and
those of his more fortunate mates . The experiences of his first day at
school were branded into his soul; and although he made friends by his
bright face and kind and honest nature , scarcely a day passed during
his six years of village schooling without his absurd name flying out
at him from some unsuspected ambush and making him wince . 

[ 16: From the _Youth ' s Companion_ , November 26 , 1903 . ]

It was bad enough when the guying came from a boy , but when a girl
took to punning , jeering , or giggling at him it seemed as if his
burden was greater than he could bear . Then he would go home through
the woods and fields to avoid human beings , so hurt and unhappy that
nothing but his mother ' s greeting and the smell of a good supper could
cheer him . 

At home he had no trouble . His mother and his baby sister called him
Obie , and sweet was his name on their lips . His father , who had
objected to  " Obadiah " from the first , called him Bub or Bubby; but one
can bear almost any name when it comes with a loving smile or a pat on
the shoulder , which was Mr . Waddle ' s way of addressing his only son . 

Very early in life it had been explained to Obadiah that he was named
for his mother ' s favourite brother , who went to California to live , 
after hanging a silver dollar on a black silk cord round the neck of
his little namesake . 

Obadiah often looked at this dollar , which was kept in a little box
with a broken earring , a hair chain , a glass breastpin , and an ancient
 " copper " ; and sometimes on circus days or on the Fourth of July he
wished there was no hole in it that he might expend it on side-shows
and lemonade or on monstrous firecrackers . 

But he knew that his mother valued it highly because Uncle Obie gave
it to him and because there were little dents in it made by his
vigorous first teeth; so he always returned it to the box with a sigh
of resignation , and made the most of the twenty-five cents given him
by his father on the great days of the year . 

When he was eleven years old the Waddle family moved West , and the
last thing Obadiah heard as the train pulled away from the little
station of his native town was this verse , lustily shouted from a
group of schoolmates assembled to bid him good-bye:

  " Oh , Obadiah , you ' re going West , 
 Where the prairie winds don ' t have no rest , 
 You ' ll have to waddle your level best . 
 Good-bye , my lover , good-bye ! " 

Ill-fortune attended the Waddles in their western home . To be sure , 
they had their rich , broad acres , with never a stone or a stump to
hinder the smooth cutting plow , but a frightful midsummer storm in the
second year literally wiped out crops and cattle , and left them with
their bare lives in their lowly sod house . 

 " Drought first year , tornado second . If next year ' s a failure , we ' ll
go back--if we can raise money enough to go with . Three times and then
out ! " said Mr . Waddle . 

Mrs . Waddle broke down and wept . It scared the children to learn that
their mother could cry--their mother , who was always so bright and
cheerful and who always laughed away their griefs ! 

Mr . Waddle was scared , too . He bent down and patted her shoulder--his
favourite way of soothing beast or human being . 

 " Now , Mary , Mary ! Don ' t you go back on us . We can stand everything as
long as you are all right . Don ' t feel bad ! We ' ll pick up again . 
There ' s time enough yet to grow turnips and fodder corn . " 

 " But what will we fodder it to ? " wailed Mrs . Waddle . 

Mr . Waddle could not answer , thinking of his splendid horses , and of
his pure Jersey cows that would never answer to his call again . 

 " Well , I am ashamed of myself ! " said Mrs . Waddle , after a few moments , 
bravely drying her eyes .  " And I ' m wicked , too ! I ' ve just wished that
something would happen so we ' d have to go back East , and it ' s
happened; and we might have all been killed . And I ' m going to stop
just where I am . I don ' t care where we live--or how we live--so long
as we are all together--and well--and there ' s a crust in the house and
water to drink . " 

Rising , she seized the broom and began vigorously to sweep together
the leaves and grass which the cyclone had cast in through the open
door . 

 " I declare , Mary ! " said Mr . Waddle .  " Do you mean to say you ' ve been
homesick all this time ? " 

 " I ' d give more for the north side of one of those old Vermont hills
than I would for the whole prairie ! " was the emphatic reply .  " But I ' m
not going to say another single word . " 

Mr . Waddle felt a thrill of comfort in knowing he was not alone in his
yearning for the old home . It was singular that these two , who loved
each other so truly , could so hide their inmost feelings . Each had
feared to appear weak to the other . 

Mr . Waddle looked at his wife with almost a radiant smile .  " Well , 
Mary , we ' ll go back in the fall--if we can sell . I guess we can hire
the Deacon Elbridge place I see by last week ' s paper it ' s still for
sale or rent , and carpenter work in old Hartbridge is about as
profitable for me as farming out West . " 

 " I ' m glad you wouldn ' t mind going back , Homer , " said Mrs . Waddle , and
they looked at each other as in the days of their courtship . 

But selling the farm was not easy , and October found the Waddles in
painful straits . 

 " What will we have for Thanksgiving , Ma ? " asked Obadiah . 

 " Oh , a pair of nice prairie chickens , mashed turnips , hot biscuits , 
and melted sugar , " cheerfully replied Mrs . Waddle . 

 " That sounds pretty good , " said Obadiah; but when he got out of doors
he said to himself that you could not shoot prairie chickens without
ammunition , and that he had no bait even if he tried to use his quail
traps . He also reflected that his mother looked thin and pale , that
sister Ellie needed shoes , and that plum pudding and mince pie used to
be on Thanksgiving tables . But this was the day for his story
paper--post-office day--which seemed to cheer things up somehow . 

When he went to town for the mail he would see if his father , who was
at work carpentering on a barn , could not spare a dime for a little
powder and shot . So the boy trudged away on his long walk , with his
empty gun on his shoulder and the hope of youth in his heart . 

His father , busy at work , greeted him cheerily , but had no dime for
powder and shot . Pay for the work was not to be had until the first of
December , and meanwhile every penny must be saved--for coal and for
Ellie ' s shoes . 

 " It leaves Thanksgiving out in the cold , doesn ' t it , Bub ? But we ' ll
make it up at Christmas , maybe , " said Mr . Waddle , as Obadiah turned to
go .  " Here ' s three cents for a bite of candy for Sis , and take good
care of mother . I ' ll be home day after to-morrow , likely . " 

Obadiah jingled the three pennies in his pocket as he walked to the
combined store and post-office . Three cents ! They would buy a charge
or two of powder and shot , and he still had a few caps . And candy was
not good for people anyhow ! He wished he had asked his father if he
might buy ammunition instead . 

 " But I ' ll not bother him again , " he decided ,  " and Sis will be glad
enough of the candy . " 

He would not buy rashly . He looked over the jars of striped sticks , 
peppermint drops , chocolate mice , and mixed varieties . Then he sat
down on a nail keg to await the distribution of the mail . He watched
the people standing by for the opening of the delivery window . It was
a rare thing for his family to get a letter , but then they seldom sent
one . 

Once in a while a newspaper came from Uncle Obadiah , but only one
letter in two years . Perhaps if he knew what hard luck they were
having he would write oftener . The boy had heard his mother say only
the week before that she wanted to write to Brother Obie , but was no
hand at letters , especially when there was no good news to write . 

A thought now came to young Obadiah . He would write to his Uncle
to-morrow , and his brain began fairly to hum with what he would say . 
When his time came he invested one cent in a clean white stick of
candy and the remaining two in a postage stamp .  " I ' ll pay two cents
back to pa as soon as I get the answer , " he said confidently to his
questioning conscience . 

His walk home abounded in exasperations . Never had game appeared so
plentiful . Three separate flocks of prairie chickens flew directly
over his head , a rabbit scurried across his path , and in the stubble
of the ruined grainfields rose and fell little clouds of quail . 

 " They just know it ain ' t loaded ! " grumbled Obadiah , trudging with his
empty gun . 

That night , after Sis had gone to sleep , and his mother had lain down
beside her , cheerfully remarking that bed was cheaper than fire , and
that she was glad there was a good wood lot on the Elbridge place , 
Obadiah , behind the sheltering canvas partition that separated the
kitchen from the bedrooms , wrote the following letter:

 DEAR UNCLE:--Last year our crops were burned up by the
 drought and this year they were swept away by a cyclone and
 all the stock was killed , and father will not get his pay
 for carpenter work until December . If there was no hole in
 the dollar you gave me when I was a baby I would take it and
 buy something for Thanksgiving . I wish you would send me a
 dollar without a hole in it as soon as you can and I will
 send you the one with a hole in it . I would send it now but
 I have not got stamps enough . I hope you are well . We are
 all well , only ma is homesick . Your sincere nephew , 

OBADIAH WADDLE . 

 P . S . --Please send your answer right to me , because I want
 to surprise ma with some things for Thanksgiving . 

The next morning he set off to look at his most distant quail traps , 
found them empty , and circled round to the village , where he posted
his letter . 

The days crept slowly by , and times grew more and more uncomfortable
in the little sod house . Often when Obadiah was doing his  " sums " his
pencil would shy off to a corner of his slate and scribble a list of
items something like this:

2 cents to Pa $ . 02
Stamps and paper  ( to send the D )  . 06
Powder and shot  . 10
Tea and sugar for Ma  . 30
1 lb . raisens  . 15
6 eggs  . 08
1 lb . butter  . 20
 ------
  . 91
More powder  . 09
 ------
 $1 . 00

Sometimes he would set down half a pound of  " raisens " and add  " candy
for Sis ,  . 05 , " but this was in his reckless moments . Sober second
thought always convinced him that  " raisens " would bring the greatest
good to the greatest number about Thanksgiving time . 

He casually asked his mother how long it took people to go to
California . 

 " Well , Uncle Obie ' s newspapers always get here about four or five days
after they are printed . Dear me ! I must write to your Uncle Obie just
as soon as we can spare the money for paper and stamps . He ' ll be glad
to know we are all alive and well , and that ' s about all I can tell
him . " 

Obadiah smiled broadly behind his geography and began reckoning the
days . The answer might arrive about the 18th , but he heroically waited
until the 21st before going to ask for it . He reached the village long
before mail time , but saw so many things to consider in the grocery
and provision line that he was almost surprised when the rattle of the
 " mail rig " and an in-gathering of people told that the important time
had arrived . 

The Waddles had given up their box , so he could not expect to see his
letter until it should be handed out to him from the general  " W " pile . 
He waited patiently . The fortunate owners of lock boxes took out their
letters with a proud air while the distributing was still going on . 
Others , who had mere open boxes , drew close and tried to read inverted
superscriptions with poor success . Others who never had either letters
or papers , but who came in at this hour from force of habit , stood
near the stove or leaned on the counters and spoke of the weather and
swapped feeble jokes . Finally the small wooden window was flung open . 
The little group got its papers and letters and gradually retired . 

 " Any letter for me ? " cried Obadiah , his heart jumping . 

 " Nope; your pa got your papers last Saturday . " 

 " But--ain ' t there a letter--for me ? " 

The man hastily ran over the half-dozen  " W " missives .  " Nope . " 

Obadiah ' s heart was heavy as lead now . He went out into the sleety
weather and faced the long walk home . His eyes were so blurred with
tears he could hardly see and his feet came near slipping . 

A derisive shout came from across the street:  " Hallo ! Pretty bad
 ' waddling ' this weather ! " 

Obadiah pulled his hat over his eyes and tramped on in scornful
silence . 

And now another voice called out to him , a voice from the rear:  " Oh , 
say ! Waddle ! Come back here--package for ye ! " Obadiah hastily went
back , his heart leaping . 

 " Registered package , " explained the postmaster .  " ' Most forgot it . Sign
your name on that line . Odd name you ' ve got . No danger your mail going
to some other fellow . " 

Obadiah laughed and said he guessed not , and hardly believing his
senses , again started for home , and soon struck out upon the
far-stretching road . In the privacy of the great prairie he looked at
the package again . How heavy it was for such a small one , and how
important looked the long row of stamps; and there was Uncle Obadiah ' s
name in one corner , proving that it was truly the answer ! 

There must be a jackknife in it , or something besides the dollar . He
cut the stout twine , removed the wrapper , and lifted the cover of a
strong paper box . There was something wrapped in neat white paper and
feeling very solid . 

Obadiah removed the paper , and a heavy , handsome and very fat leather
purse slipped into his hand . He opened it . It had several
compartments , and in each one were three or more hard , flat , round
objects wrapped in more white paper to keep them from jingling , very
likely . 

Obadiah unwrapped one of these round , flat objects , and even in the
dull light of the drizzling and fading November day he could see that
it was a bright , clean , shining silver dollar--and had no hole in it . 

With hands fairly shaking with joy , he returned the purse to the box
and sped homeward . He ran all the way , only slowing up for breath now
and then , but it was dark , and the poor little supper was waiting when
he reached the house . The small lamp did not shed a very brilliant
light , but a mother does not need an electric glare in order to read
her child ' s face . 

 " Well , Obie , what ' s happened ? " asked his mother as soon as he was
inside the door .  " Have you caught a whole flock of quails ? " 

 " Something better ' n quails ! Guess again , Ma ! " 

 " Three nice fat prairie hens then . " 

 " Something better ' n prairie hens . " And then Obie could wait no longer . 
He pulled the package from under his coat and tossed it down beside
the poor old teapot , which had known little but hot water these many
weeks . 

 " Why , it ' s from Brother Obie--to _you_ ! " exclaimed his mother , while
his father drew near and said ,  " Well , well ! " 

 " And look inside ! I haven ' t half looked yet , " said Obie ,  " but _you_
look , Ma ! I just want you to look ! " 

Ma opened the box , and then the purse , and then the fourteen round
objects wrapped in white paper . And they made a fine glitter on the
red tablecloth . 

 " Well , _well_ ! " repeated Mr . Waddle . 

 " And here ' s something written , " said Mrs . Waddle , taking a paper from
a pocket at the back of the purse . 

 " Read it , Ma--out loud ! _I_ don ' t care , " said Obie generously . 

So Ma read it in a voice that trembled a little:

 MY DEAR NEPHEW:--If I count rightly , it is thirteen years
 since your good mother labelled you Obadiah . I ' m not near
 enough to give you thirteen slaps--I wish I were--so I send
 you thirteen dollars , and one to grow on . Never mind
 returning the dollar with the hole in it--keep it for your
 grandchildren to cut their teeth on . Give my love to your
 parents and little sister; and if you look the purse through
 closely , I think you will find something of interest to your
 mother . It is about time she paid our old Vermont a visit . 
 Be a good boy . 

Your affectionate uncle , 

OBADIAH BROWN . 

 " Oh , that blessed brother ! " cried Mrs . Waddle , wiping her eyes with
her apron . 

Obie seized the purse and examined it on all sides . It was a very
wizard of a purse , for another little flat pocket was found in its
inmost centre , and from it Obie drew out another bit of folded paper
and opened it . 

 " Why , it ' s a check ! " shouted Mr . Waddle .  " A check for you , Mary , 
for--two--hundred--dollars ! My ! There ' s a brother for you ! " 

 " Oh , not two _hundred_--it must be twenty--it can ' t be-- " faltered
Mrs . Waddle , wiping her eyes to look at the paper . 

Then she gave a little cry and fell to hugging all her family .  " We can
all go back--we can go next week ! " and she almost danced up and down
on the unresponsive clay floor . 

 " I owe you two cents , Pa , and I ' ll pay it back to you just as soon as
I can get a dollar changed , " said Obadiah proudly , fingering the
shining coins . 

 " How ' s that , Bubby ? " 

Then Obadiah explained . 

 " I hope you didn ' t complain , Obie , " said his mother , her happy face
clouding . 

 " Well , I told him about the drought and the cyclone . I guess if I was
a near relation I wouldn ' t call that complaining . And then I asked him
if he wouldn ' t swap dollars with me , so I could have one without a
hole in it to get something for Thanks-- " 

Mr . Waddle broke in with a shout of laughter , and Mrs . Waddle kissed
her son once more , and laughed , too , although her eyes were full of
tears . And then Obadiah knew everything was all right . 

 " We can have Thanksgiving now , can ' t we , Ma ? " he asked .  " It ' s so near;
and I ' m going to get all the things . We ' ll have chicken pie--_tame_
chicken pie--and plum pudding--and butter--and cream for the
coffee--and cranberries--and lump sugar--and pumpkin pie--and-- " 

 " Oh , me wants supper ! " exclaimed Sis . And then they laughed again , and
fell upon the cooling corn-bread and molasses and melancholy bits of
fried pork and the thin ghost of tea as if they were already engaged
in a feast of Thanksgiving . And so they were . 




THE WHITE TURKEY ' S WING[17]

BY SOPHIE SWETT . 

 Priscilla , the big white hen turkey , deserved a better fate
 than to be eaten on Thanksgiving Day , and Minty and Jason
 contrived to save her . 


Mary Ellen was coming home from her school teaching at the Falls , and
Nahum from  ' tending in Blodgett ' s store at Edom Four Corners , and
Uncle and Aunt Piper with Mirandy and Augustus and the twins were
coming from Juniper Hill , and there was every prospect of as merry a
Thanksgiving as one could wish to see . And Thanksgivings were always
merry at the Kittredge farm on Red Hill . Uncle Kittredge might be a
trifle over thrifty--a leetle nigh , his neighbours called him--but
there was no stinting at Thanksgiving , and when a boy is accustomed to
perpetual corn-bread and sausages , he knows how to appreciate
unlimited turkey and plum pudding; and when he is used to gloomy
evenings , in which Uncle Kittredge holds the one feeble kerosene lamp
between himself and a newspaper , Aunt Kittredge knits in silent
meditation on blue yarn stockings , he knows how good it is to have the
house filled with lights and people , jolly games going on in the
parlour , and candy-pulling in the kitchen . All these delights were
directly before Jason Kittredge as he dangled his legs from the stone
wall and whittled away at the skewers which Clorinda , the  " hired
girl , " had demanded of him , and yet his heart was as heavy as lead . 

[ 17: From _Harper ' s Young People_ , November 22 , 1892 . ]

He did not even look up when his sister Minty came up the hill toward
him . He knew it was Minty , because she was hop-skipping and humming , 
and he knew that Aunt Kittredge had sent her to Mrs . Deacon Preble ' s
to get a recipe for snow pudding; she had said she  " must have
something real stylish , because she had invited the new minister and
his daughter to dinner . " 

 " Oh , Jason , don ' t you wish it was always going to be Thanksgiving Day
after to-morrow ? " Minty continued her hop-skipping; she went to and
fro before the dejected figure on the wall . Minty was tall for twelve , 
and she had a very high forehead , which made Aunt Kittredge think that
she was going to be  " smart . " Aunt Kittredge made her comb her hair
straight back from the high forehead , and fasten it with a round comb;
not a vestige of hair showed under Minty ' s blue hood , and her forehead
looked bleak and cold , and her pale blue eyes were watery , and her new
teeth were large and overlapped each other; but Aunt Kittredge said it
was no matter , if she was only good and  " smart . " 

 " Why , Jason , is anything the matter ? " Minty stopped , breathless , and
the joy faded out of her face . Jason continued to whittle in gloomy
silence . His hands were almost purple with cold , and the wind flapped
his large pantaloons--they were Uncle Kittredge ' s old ones , and Aunt
Kittredge never thought it worth the while to consider the fit if they
were turned up so that he could walk in them . 

 " You don ' t care because the new minister and his daughter are coming ? " 
pursued Minty . Jason ' s tastes , as she well knew , did not incline to
ministers and schoolmasters as companions in merrymaking .  " She ' s a big
girl , almost sixteen , and she will go with Mary Ellen , and we shall
have Mirandy and Augustus and the twins , and the Sedgell girls and
Nehemiah Ham are coming in the evening , and we shall have such fun , 
and such lots to eat ! " 

 " That ' s just like you . You ' re friv ' lous . You don ' t know what an awful
hard world it is . You haven ' t got a realizing sense , " said Jason
crushingly . 

This last accusation was one with which Aunt Kittredge was accustomed
to overwhelm Clorinda when she burned the pies or wore her best bonnet
to evening meeting . Minty ' s face grew so long that it looked like the
reflection of a face in a spoon , and the tears came into her eyes . It
must be a hard world , since Jason found it so . He was much
stouter-hearted than she; his round , snub-nosed , freckled face was
generally as cheerful as the sunshine . Jason had his troubles--Minty
well knew what they were--but he bore them manfully . He didn ' t like to
have Clorinda use his hens ' eggs when he was saving them to sell , and
perhaps it was even more trying to be at school when the eggs man
came around , and have Aunt Kittredge sell his eggs and put the money
into her pocket . Jason wished to go into business for himself , and he
had a high opinion of the poultry business for a beginning . Cyrus , 
their  " hired man , " had once lived with a man at North Edom who made
fabulous sums by raising poultry . But Aunt Kittredge ' s peculiar views
of the rights of boys interfered with his accumulation of the
necessary capital . All these troubles Jason bore bravely . It must be
some great misfortune that caused him to look so utterly despairing , 
and to accuse her of such dreadful things , thought poor Minty . 

Jason took pity on her woful face .  " P ' raps you ' re not so much to
blame , Mint . You don ' t know , " he said , in a somewhat softened tone . 
 " It ' s Aunt Kittredge . " 

Minty heaved a long , long sigh . It generally _was_ Aunt Kittredge . 

 " She ' s told Cyrus to kill the--the white turkey ! " continued Jason , 
with almost a break in his voice . 

 " To kill Priscilla ! " gasped Minty .  " She couldn ' t--she wouldn ' t ! Oh , 
Jason , Cyrus won ' t do it , will he ? " 

 " Hasn ' t he got to if she says so ? " demanded Jason grimly . 

 " But Priscilla is yours , " said Minty stoutly . 

 " She says she only let me call her mine . Just as if I didn ' t save her
out of that weak brood when all the rest were killed by the
thunderstorm ! And brought her up in cotton behind the kitchen stove , 
no matter how much Clorinda scolded ! And found her nest with
thirty-one eggs in it in the old pine stump ! And she knows me and
follows me round . " 

 " I shouldn ' t think Aunt Kittredge would want to , " said Minty
reflectively . 

 " She wants a big turkey , because the minister and his daughter are
coming to dinner , and she doesn ' t want to have one of the young ones
killed , because she is too stin-- " 

 " I wouldn ' t care if I were you . After all , Priscilla is only a
turkey , " said Minty , attempting to be cheerful . 

But this well-meant effort at consolation aroused Jason ' s wrath . 
 " That ' s just like a girl ! " he cried .  " What do you care if you only
have blue beads and lots of candy ? " 

Poor Minty ' s face lengthened again , and her jaw fell .  " There ' s my two
dollars and thirty cents , Jason , " she said anxiously . 

Jason started; a ray of hope flushed his freckled face . 

 " We can buy a big turkey over at Jonas Hicks ' s for all that money , " 
continued Minty . And then she drew nearer to Jason , and added a
thrilling whisper ,  " And we can hide Priscilla ! " 

Jason stared at her in amazement . He had never expected Minty to come
to the front in an emergency . Perhaps the high forehead meant
something after all .  " _She_ ' ll be after you about the money , you
know , " he said , with a significant nod toward the house . 

 " It ' s my own . I earned it picking berries and weeding old Mrs . 
Jackman ' s garden . It ' s in my bank , and the bank won ' t open till
there ' s five dollars in it . " 

Jason ' s face darkened . 

 " But we can smash it , " said Minty calmly . 

_Certainly_ the high forehead meant something . 

Priscilla was hidden . The  " smashing " was done in extreme privacy
behind the stone wall of the pasture . Cyrus was bound over to secrecy , 
as was also Jonas Hicks , who , after some haggling , sold them his
finest turkey for two dollars and thirty cents . 

 " Cyrus is gettin ' real handy and accommodatin ' , " said Clorinda the
next morning , when they were all in the kitchen , and Jason , ignobly
arrayed in Clorinda ' s kitchen-belle apron , was chopping , and Minty was
seeding raisins .  " I expected nothin ' but what I ' d got to pick the
white turkey , and he ' s fetched her in all picked and drawed . " 

 " She don ' t weigh quite so much as I expected , " said Uncle Kittredge , 
as he suspended the turkey on the hook of the old steelyards . 

Jason and Minty slyly exchanged anxious glances . Neither of them had
looked at the turkey , and Minty ' s face was suffused with red even to
the roots of her tow-coloured hair . 

Mary Ellen and Nahum came that night , and bright and early on the
morning of Thanksgiving Day came Uncle and Aunt Piper with Mirandy and
Augustus and the twins , and the house was full of noise and jollity . 
Jason was obliged to go to church in the morning with the grown
people , but Minty stayed at home to help Clorinda , and after much
manoeuvring she found an opportunity to run down to the shanty in
the logging road and feed the white turkey . The new minister and his
daughter came to dinner , and Jason and Minty were glad that the
children had seats at the far end of the table . The minister ' s
daughter was sixteen , and looked very stylish , and Aunt Kittredge said
she was glad enough that they had the snow pudding , and that she had
asked Aunt Piper to bring her sauce dishes . 

It had begun to be very merry at the far end of the table , in a quiet
way , for Aunt Kittredge ' s stern eye wandered constantly in that
direction , and Jason and Minty had almost forgotten that there were
trials and difficulties in life , when suddenly Aunt Piper ' s loud voice
sounded across the table , striking terror to their souls:

 " You don ' t say that this is the white turkey ? Seems kind of a pity to
kill her , she was so handsome . But she eats real well . Now , you
mustn ' t forget to let me take a wing home to Sabriny . You know you
always promised her a wing for her hat when the white turkey was
killed . " 

Sabriny was Aunt Piper ' s niece , who had been left at home to keep
house . 

 " Sure enough I did , " said Aunt Kittredge .  " Jason , you go out to the
barn and get Cyrus to give you one of the white turkey ' s wings; and
Minty , you wrap it up nice , so it will be handy for your aunt to
carry . Go as soon as you ' ve ate your dinner , so ' s to have it ready , 
for Uncle Piper has got to get home before sundown . " 

 " Yes ' m , " answered Jason hoarsely , without lifting his eyes from his
plate . He could scarcely eat another mouthful , and Minty found it
unexpectedly easy to obey Aunt Kittredge ' s injunction to decline snow
pudding lest there should not be  " enough to go round . " 

 " What are you going to do ? " asked Minty , overtaking Jason , as he
walked dejectedly through the woodshed as soon as dinner was over . 

 " I don ' t know; run away and be a cowboy like Hiram Trickey , I guess . " 

Minty ' s heart gave a great throb . Hiram Trickey had sent home a
photograph , which showed him to have become very like the picture of a
pirate in Cyrus ' s old book , with pistols and a dirk at his belt . 

 " Jason , the new minister ' s daughter has got a white gull ' s wing on her
hat , and--it ' s up in the spare chamber on the bed , and I don ' t think
Sabriny would ever know the difference . " 

Jason stared in mild-eyed speechless wonder . Minty had never shown
herself a leading spirit before . 

 " It will be dark before the minister ' s daughter goes , and there ' s a
veil over the hat , and if we put a little something white on it I ' m
sure she won ' t notice . And when she does notice she won ' t know what
became of it . And we can save up and buy her another gull ' s wing . " 

 " Sabriny ' ll know , " said Jason , but there was an accent of hope in his
voice . 

 " They don ' t have turkeys , and they know that Priscilla wasn ' t a common
turkey; perhaps they won ' t know the difference , " said Minty .  " Anyway , 
it will give us time to get Priscilla out of the way . If Aunt
Kittredge finds out , she will have her killed right away . " 

 " You go and get the wing off the minister ' s daughter ' s hat , Mint , " 
directed Jason firmly . 

Minty worked with trembling fingers in the chilly seclusion of the
spare chamber , but she made a neat package . And she stuck on to the
hat in place of the wing some feathers from the white rooster . 

There was an awful moment as Uncle and Aunt Piper were leaving . 

 " Just let me see whether he ' s got a real handsome wing , " said Aunt
Kittredge , taking the package which Minty had put into Aunt Piper ' s
hand . 

 " Malachi is in considerable of a hurry , and they ' ve done it up so
nice , " said Aunt Piper .  " There ! I  ' most forgot my sauce dishes , and
Sabriny ' s going to have company to-morrow ! " 

Minty drew a long breath of relief as the carriage disappeared down
the lane , and Jason privately confided to her his opinion that she was
 " an orfle smart girl . " 

There was another dreadful moment when the minister ' s daughter went
home . They had played games until a very late hour , for Corinna , and
she dressed so hurriedly that she did not observe that anything had
happened to her hat , but as she went down the garden walk Jason and
Minty saw in the moonlight the rooster ' s feathers blowing from it . 

The next morning , in the privacy afforded by the great woodpile , to
which Jason had gone to chop his daily stint , the children debated the
advisability of committing the white turkey to the care of Lot Rankin , 
who lived with his widowed mother on the edge of the woods . 

 " It ' s hard to get a chance to feed her , " said Jason ,  " and she may
squawk . " 

 " Lot Rankin may tell , " suggested Minty . And she heaved a great sigh . 
Conspiracy came hard to Minty . 

Just then the voice of the new minister ' s daughter came to their ears . 
She was talking with Aunt Kittredge on the other side of the woodpile . 

 " There was a high wind last night when I went home , and I suppose it
blew away . I am very sorry to lose it , because it was so pretty , and
it was a present , too , " she said . 

 " Maybe the children have found it; they ' re round everywhere , " said
Aunt Kittredge . And then she called shrilly to Jason . 

Minty shrank down in a little heap behind a huge log as Jason stepped
bravely out from behind the woodpile , and answered promptly that he
had not seen the gull ' s wing . That was literally true; but how _she_
was going to answer , Minty did not know . 

It was so great a relief that tears sprang to Minty ' s eyes when , after
a little more conversation , the minister ' s daughter went away . Aunt
Kittredge had taken it for granted that , as she remarked ,  " if one of
them young ones didn ' t know anything about it the other didn ' t . " 

Minty felt her burden of guilt to be greater than she could bear . And
there was no way in which she could earn money enough to buy the
minister ' s daughter a new feather until berries were ripe and the
weeds grew in old Mrs . Jackman ' s garden . Minty racked her brains to
think of something she could give the minister ' s daughter to ease her
troubled conscience . There was her Bunker Hill monument , made of
shells , her most precious treasure; she would gladly have parted with
even that , but it stood upon the table in the parlour , and Aunt
Kittredge would discover so soon that it had gone . And Aunt Kittredge
was quite capable of asking the minister ' s daughter to return it . 
Minty felt , despairingly , that this atonement was impossible . 

But suddenly a bright idea struck her . The feather on her summer
Sunday hat ! It was blue--it had been white originally , but Aunt
Kittredge had thriftily had it dyed when it became soiled . Blue would
be very becoming to the minister ' s daughter , and perhaps she would
like it as well as her gull ' s wing . There was another sly visit to the
chilly spare chamber . Minty took the summer Sunday hat from its
bandbox in the closet , and carefully abstracted the blue feather . It
was slightly faded , and there were some traces of the wetting it had
received in a thunderstorm in spite of the handkerchief which Aunt
Kittredge carefully pinned over it; but Minty thought it still a very
beautiful feather . She put it into a little pasteboard box , wrote the
minister ' s daughter ' s name on it , placed it on her doorstep at dusk , 
rang the bell , and ran away . 

It was nearly a week before she could find this opportunity to present
the feather , for Aunt Kittredge didn ' t allow her to go out after dark;
and in all that time they had not been able to negotiate with Lot
Rankin , for Lot had the mumps on both sides at once , and could not be
seen . But the very next day after the minister ' s daughter received her
feather--as if things were all coming right , thought Minty
hopefully--Uncle Kittredge sent her down to Lot Rankin ' s to find out
when he would be strong enough to help Cyrus in the logging camp; and
Jason gave her many charges concerning the contract she was to make
with Lot . But as she was going out of the house , there stood the
minister ' s daughter in the doorway , talking with Aunt Kittredge . 

 " I shouldn ' t have known where it came from if Miss Plympton , the
milliner , hadn ' t happened to come in , " the young girl was saying .  " She
said at once ,  ' It ' s Minty Kittredge ' s feather . I had it dyed for her
last summer , and there ' s the little tag from the dye-house on it now . ' 
I can ' t think why she sent it to me . " 

Aunt Kittredge turned to the shrinking figure behind her , holding the
blue feather accusingly in her hand . 

 " Araminta Kittredge , what does this mean ? " she demanded sternly . 

 " I--I--she felt so bad about her gull ' s wing , and--and-- " A rising sob
fairly choked Minty . 

 " Please don ' t scold her . I ' m sure she can explain , " pleaded the
minister ' s daughter . 

 " It ' s my duty to find out just what this means , " said Aunt Kittredge
severely .  " I never heard of a child doing such a high-handed thing ! 
You can do your errand now , because your uncle wants you to , but when
you come back I shall have a settlement with you . " 

Poor Minty ! She ran fast , never looking back , although the minister ' s
daughter called to her in kindliest tones . 

There was no hope of keeping a secret from Aunt Kittredge when once
she had discovered that there was one . The only chance of saving
Priscilla ' s life lay in persuading Lot Rankin to care for and conceal
her . 

But , alas ! she found that Lot was not to be persuaded . He was going
into the woods to work , and his mother was  " set against turkeys . " 
Moreover , she was  " so lonesome most of the time that when folks _did_
come along she told  ' em all she knew . " 

Jason , who had been very anxious , met her at the corner . Perhaps it
was not to be wondered at that Jason was somewhat cross and
unreasonable . He said only a girl would be so foolish as to send that
feather to the minister ' s daughter . Girls were all silly , even those
who had high foreheads , and he would never trust one again . He hoped
she was going to have sense enough not to tell , no matter what Aunt
Kittredge did . 

Poor Minty felt herself to be quite unequal to resisting Aunt
Kittredge , but she swallowed a lump in her throat and said firmly that
she would try to have sense enough . 

As they passed the blacksmith ' s shop , Liphlet , Uncle Piper ' s man , 
called out to them:  " Mebbe I shan ' t have time to go up to your house . 
The blacksmith is sick , so I had to come over here to get the mare
shod , and I wish you ' d tell your aunt that Sabriny says  ' twan ' t no
turkey ' s wing that she sent her:  ' twas some kind of a sea-bird ' s wing , 
and it come off of somebody ' s bunnit , and she ' s a-goin ' to fetch it
back ! " 

Minty and Jason answered not a word , but as they went on they looked
at each other despairingly . 

 " We should have been found out anyway , " said Minty . 

Her pitifully white face seemed to touch Jason and arouse a spark of
manly courage in his bosom . 

 " I ' ll stand by you , Mint , feather and all . You can ' t help being a
girl , " he said magnanimously .  " And I won ' t run away to be a cowboy
like Hiram Trickey . " 

Minty gave him a little grateful glance , but she could not speak . It
did not seem so dreadful now about Hiram Trickey . She wished that a
girl could run away to be a cowboy . 

As they slowly and dejectedly drew near the house , they saw a horse
and a farm wagon at the door , and through the window they discovered
that Uncle and Aunt Kittredge , Clorinda , and Cyrus were all in the
kitchen . There was a visitor . Here was at least a slight reprieve . 
They went around through the woodshed; it seemed advisable to approach
Aunt Kittredge with caution , even in the presence of a visitor . 

 " Well , I must say I ' m consid ' able disappointed , " the visitor was
saying , as they softly opened the door . He was a bluff , burly man , who
sat with his tall whip between his knees .  " I ought to  ' a ' stopped when
I see her out there top of the stone wall the last time I come by--the
handsomest turkey cretur I ever did see , and I ' ve been in the poultry
business this twenty years . I knew in a minute she belonged to that
breed that old Mis ' Joskins had; she fetched  ' em from York State . She
moved away before I knew it , and carried  ' em all with her . " 

 " I bought some eggs of her , and  ' most all of  ' em hatched , but that
white turkey was the only one that lived , " said Aunt Kittredge .  " I
declare if I ' d known she was anything more ' n common , and worthy of
havin ' her picture in a book-- " 

 " You ' d ought to have known it , Maria ! " said Uncle Kittredge testily . 
 " I wa ' n ' t for havin ' her killed , and you ' d ought to have heard to me ! " 

 " I was calc ' latin ' to hev her picter right in the front of my new
poultry book , " continued the visitor , whom the children now recognized
as the distinguished poultry dealer of North Edom for whom Cyrus had
once worked .  " And I was going to have printed under it ,  ' From the farm
of Abner Kittredge , Esq . , Corinna . ' Be kind of a boom for you  ' n ' 
Corinna , too--see ? And if you didn ' t want to sell her right out , I
was calc ' latin ' to make you a handsome offer for all the eggs she
laid . " 

 " There ! Now you see what you ' ve done , Maria ! I declare I wouldn ' t
gredge givin ' a twenty dollar bill to fetch that white turkey back ! " 
exclaimed Uncle Kittredge . 

 " Oh , oh ! Uncle Kittredge ! " Minty broke away from Jason , who would have
held her back , not feeling sure that it was quite time to speak , and
rushed into the room .  " You needn ' t give twenty dollars ! Priscilla is
down in the little shanty in the logging wood ! We saved her--Jason and
I--and we bought a turkey of Jonas Hicks instead . I paid with my own
money , Aunt Kittredge ! And then I--I took the gull ' s wing off the
minister ' s daughter ' s hat to send to Sabriny , and--and so that ' s why I
sent her the blue feather , and--and Sabriny ' s going to send the gull ' s
wing back-- " 

 " Jason , you go and fetch that turkey home ! " said Uncle Kittredge . 
 " And , Maria , don ' t you blame them children one mite ! " 

 " I never heard of such high-handed doin ' s ! " gasped Aunt Kittredge . 

 " I expect I shall have to send you children each a copy of my book
with the picter of that turkey in it , " said the poultry dealer .  " And
maybe the boy and I can make kind of a contract about eggs and
chickens . " 

The minister ' s daughter wore her gull ' s wing to church the next
Sunday , and she privately confided to Minty that she  " didn ' t blame her
one bit . " Aunt Kittredge looked at Minty somewhat severely for
several days but only as she looked at her when she turned around in
church or fidgeted in the long prayer . And after the poultry book came
out with Priscilla ' s photograph as a frontispiece , and people began to
make pilgrimages to the Red Hill farm to see the poultry , she was
heard to say several times that  " it was wonderful to see how a smart
boy like Jason could make turkey raising pay , " and that  " as for Minty , 
she always knew that high forehead of hers wasn ' t for nothing . " 




THE THANKSGIVING GOOSE[18]

BY FANNIE WILDER BROWN . 

 How a little boy learned to be thankful . A charming story
 even though it _has_ a moral . 

 " But I don ' t like roast goose , " said Guy , pouting .  " I ' d rather have
turkey . Turkey is best for Thanksgiving , anyway . Goose is for
Christmas . " 

[ 18: From the _Youth ' s Companion_ , November 26 , 1908 . ]

Guy ' s mother did not answer . He watched her while she carefully wrote
G . T . W . on the corner of a pretty new red-bordered handkerchief . Five
others , all alike , and all marked alike , lay beside it . The initials
were his own . 

 " Why didn ' t you buy some blue ones ? I ' d rather have them different , " 
he said . 

Mrs . Wright smiled a queer little smile , but did not answer . She
lighted a large lamp and held the marked corner of one of the
handkerchiefs against the hot chimney . The heat made the indelible ink
turn dark , although the writing had been so faint Guy hardly could see
it before . 

 " Oh , dear , " he cried ,  " there ' s a little blot at the top of that T ! I
don ' t want to carry a handkerchief that has a blot on it . " 

 " Very well , " said his mother .  " I ' ll put them away , and you may carry
your old ones until you ask me to let you carry this one . I don ' t care
to furnish new things for a boy who doesn ' t appreciate them . " 

 " I don ' t like old-- " 

 " That ' ll do , Guy . Never mind the rest of the things that you don ' t
like . I want you to take this dollar down to Mrs . Burns . Tell her that
I shall have a day ' s work for her on Friday , and I thought she might
like to have part of the pay in advance to help make Thanksgiving
with . Please go now . " 

 " But a dollar won ' t help much . She won ' t like that . She always acts
just as if she was as happy as anybody . I don ' t want to go there on
such an errand as that . " 

Mrs . Wright smiled again , but her tone was very grave . 

 " Mrs . Burns is  ' as happy as anybody , ' Guy , and she has the
best-behaved children in the neighbourhood . The little ones almost
never cry , and I never have seen the older ones quarrel . But there are
eight children , and Mr . Burns has only one arm , so he can ' t earn much
money . Mrs . Burns has to turn her hands to all sorts of things to keep
the children clothed and fed . She ' ll be thankful to get the
dollar--you see if she isn ' t ! And tell her if she is making mince pies
to sell this year , I ' ll take three . " 

Guy walked very slowly down the street until he came to the little
house where the Burns family lived . 

 " I ' d hate to live here , " he thought .  " I don ' t see where they all
sleep . My room isn ' t big enough , but I don ' t believe there ' s a room in
this house as big as mine . I shouldn ' t have a bit of fun , ever , if I
lived here . And I ' d hate to have my mother make pies and send me about
to sell them . " 

Then he knocked on the front door , for there was no bell . No one came . 
He could hear people talking in the distance , so he knew some of the
family were at home . Some one always was at home here to look after
the little children . He walked around to the kitchen door: it stood
open . The children were talking so fast they did not hear his knock . 

They were very busy . Katie , the eleven-year-old , and Malcolm , ten , 
Guy ' s age , were cutting citron into long , thin strips , piling it on a
big blue plate . Mary and James , the eight-year-old twins , were paring
apples with a paring machine . The long , curling skins fell in a large
stone jar standing on a clean paper , spread on the floor . Charlie , who
was only four years old , was watching to see that none of the parings
fell over the edge of the jar . Susan , who was seven , was putting
raisins , a few at a time , into a meat chopper screwed down on the
kitchen table . George , three years old , was turning the handle of the
chopper to grind the raisins . Baby Joe was creeping about the kitchen
floor after a kitten . Mrs . Burns was taking a great piece of meat from
a steaming kettle on the back of the stove . Every one was working , 
except the baby and the kitten , but all seemed to be having a glorious
time . What they were saying seemed so funny it was some time before
Guy could understand it . At last he was sure it was some kind of a
game . 

 " Mice ? " asked Susan . Mary squealed , and they all laughed . 

 " Because they ' re small , " said Mary .  " Snakes ? " 

 " They can ' t climb trees , " Mrs . Burns called out from the pantry . The
children fairly roared at that .  " A pantry with no window in it ? " 

 " Oh , we ' ve had that before , " Katie answered .  " I know what you say . 
It ' s a good place to ripen pears in when Mrs . Wright gives us some . " 

Guy knocked very loudly at that . He had not thought that he was
listening . 

The children started , but did not leave their work . They looked at
their mother .  " Jamie , " she said . Then Jamie came to meet Guy , and
invited him to walk in . 

 " What game is it ? " asked Guy , forgetting his errand . 

 " Making mince pies , " said Jamie .  " It ' s lots of fun . Don ' t you want to
play ? I ' ll let you turn the paring machine if you ' d like that best . " 

Guy said  " Thank you " and began to turn the parer eagerly . 

 " But I don ' t mean what you are doin ' , " said Guy .  " I knew that was
mince pies . I thought that was work . I meant what you were saying . It
sounds so funny ! I never heard it before . " 

 " Mamma made it up , " explained Malcolm .  " It ' s great fun . We always
play it at Thanksgiving time . You think of something that people don ' t
like , and the one who can think first tells what he is thankful for
about it . We call it  ' Thanksgiving . ' " 

Guy stayed for an hour , and played both games . Then , quite to his
surprise , the twelve o ' clock whistles blew , and he had to go home . But
he remembered his errands and did them , to the great pleasure of the
whole Burns family . 

In the afternoon Guy spent some time writing a note to his mother . It
was badly written , but it made his mother happy . It read:

 DEAR MOTHER:--I am Thankful the blot isent any bigger . I am
 Thankful the hankershefs isent black on the borders . I would
 like that one with the Blot on to put in my pocket when you
 read this . But my old ones are nice . The Burnses dont have
 things to be Thankful for but they are Thankful just the
 same . 

 I am Thankful for the Goose we are going to have . The best
 is I am Thankful I am not a Goose myself , for if I was I
 wouldent know enough to be Thankful . 

Respectfully yours , 

GUY THEODORE WRIGHT . 




AN ENGLISH DINNER OF THANKSGIVING[19]

BY GEORGE ELIOT . 

 Americans are not the only people who hold a feast each year
 after the crops are gathered into barns . 

 The older boys and girls who wish to know more of the jolly
 English farmer , Martin Poyser , and his household , will enjoy
 reading about them in George Eliot ' s great novel ,  " Adam
 Bede . " 


It was a goodly sight--that table , with Martin Poyser ' s round
good-humoured face and large person at the head of it , helping his
servants to the fragrant roast beef , and pleased when the empty plates
came again . Martin , though usually blest with a good appetite , really
forgot to finish his own beef to-night--it was so pleasant to him to
look on in the intervals of carving , and see how the others enjoyed
their supper; for were they not men who , on all the days of the year
except Christmas Day and Sundays , ate their cold dinner , in a
makeshift manner , under the hedgerows , and drank their beer out of
wooden bottles--with relish certainly , but with their mouths toward
the zenith , after a fashion more endurable to ducks than to human
bipeds . Martin Poyser had some faint conception of the flavour such
men must find in hot roast beef and fresh-drawn ale . He held his head
on one side , and screwed up his mouth , as he nudged Bartle Massey , and
watched half-witted Tom Tholer , otherwise known as  " Tom Saft , " 
receiving his second plateful of beef . A grin of delight broke over
Tom ' s face as the plate was set down before him , between his knife and
fork , which he held erect , as if they had been sacred tapers; but the
delight was too strong to continue smouldering in a grin--it burst out
the next moment in a long-drawn  " haw , haw ! " followed by a sudden
collapse into utter gravity , as the knife and fork darted down on the
prey . Martin Poyser ' s large person shook with his silent unctuous
laugh; he turned toward Mrs . Poyser to see if she , too , had been
observant of Tom , and the eyes of husband and wife met in a glance of
good-natured amusement . 

[ 19: From Chapter LIII of  " Adam Bede . " ]

But _now_ the roast beef was finished and the cloth was drawn , leaving
a fair large deal table for the bright drinking cans , and the foaming
brown jugs , and the bright brass candlesticks , pleasant to behold . 
_Now_ the great ceremony of the evening was to begin--the harvest
song , in which every man must join; he might be in tune , if he liked
to be singular , but he must not sit with closed lips . The movement was
obliged to be in triple time; the rest was _ad libitum_ . 

As to the origin of this song--whether it came in its actual state
from the brain of a single rhapsodist , or was gradually perfected by a
school or succession of rhapsodists , I am ignorant . There is a stamp
of unity , of individual genius upon it , which inclines me to the
former hypothesis , though I am not blind to the consideration that
this unity may rather have arisen from that consensus of many minds
which was a condition of primitive thought foreign to our modern
consciousness . Some will perhaps think that they detect in the first
quatrain an indication of a lost line , which later rhapsodists , 
failing in imaginative vigour , have supplied by the feeble device of
iteration; others , however , may rather maintain that this very
iteration is an original felicity to which none but the most prosaic
minds can be insensible . 

The ceremony connected with the song was a drinking ceremony .  ( That is
perhaps a painful fact , but then , you know , we cannot reform our
forefathers . ) During the first and second quatrain , sung decidedly
_forte_ , no can was filled:

  " Here ' s a health unto our master , 
 The founder of the feast;
 Here ' s a health unto our master
 And to our mistress ! 

  " And may his doings prosper , 
 Whate ' er he takes in hand , 
 For we are all his servants , 
 And are at his command . " 

But now , immediately before the third quatrain or chorus , sung
_fortissimo_ , with emphatic raps on the table , which gave the effect
of cymbals and drum together . Alick ' s can was filled , and he was
bound to empty it before the chorus ceased . 

  " Then drink , boys , drink ! 
 And see ye do not spill , 
 For if ye do , ye shall drink two , 
 For  ' tis our master ' s will . " 

When Alick had gone successfully through this test of steady-handed
manliness , it was the turn of old Kester , at his right hand--and so
on , till every man had drunk his initiatory pint under the stimulus of
the chorus . Tom Saft--the rogue--took care to spill a little by
accident; but Mrs . Poyser  ( too officiously , Tom thought ) interfered to
prevent the exaction of the penalty . 

To any listener outside the door it would have been the reverse of
obvious why the  " Drink , boys , drink ! " should have such an immediate
and often-repeated encore; but once entered , he would have seen that
all faces were at present sober , and most of them serious; it was the
regular and respectable thing for those excellent farm-labourers to
do , as much as for elegant ladies and gentlemen to smirk and bow over
their wine glasses . Bartle Massey , whose ears were rather sensitive , 
had gone out to see what sort of evening it was at an early stage in
the ceremony; and had not finished his contemplation , until a silence
of five minutes declared that  " Drink , boys , drink ! " was not likely to
begin again for the next twelve-month . Much to the regret of the boys
and Totty; on them the stillness fell rather flat , after that
glorious thumping of the table , toward which Totty , seated on her
father ' s knee , contributed with her small might and small fist . 

When Bartle rentered , however , there appeared to be a general desire
for solo music after the choral . Nancy declared that Tim the wagoner
knew a song and was  " allays singing like a lark i ' the stable " ;
whereupon Mr . Poyser said encouragingly ,  " Come , Tim , lad , let ' s hear
it . " Tim looked sheepish , tucked down his head , and said he couldn ' t
sing; but this encouraging invitation of the master ' s was echoed all
round the table . It was a conversational opportunity: everybody could
say ,  " Come , Tim " --except Alick , who never relaxed into the frivolity
of unnecessary speech . At last Tim ' s next neighbour , Ben Tholoway , 
began to give emphasis to his speech by nudges , at which Tim , growing
rather savage , said ,  " Let me alooan , will ye ? else I ' ll ma ' ye sing a
toon ye wonna like . " A good-tempered wagoner ' s patience has limits , 
and Tim was not to be urged further . 

 " Well , then , David , ye ' re the lad to sing , " said Ben , willing to show
that he was not discomfited by this check .  " Sing  ' My loove ' s a roos
wi ' out a thorn . ' " 

The amatory David was a young man of an unconscious abstracted
expression , which was due probably to a squint of superior intensity
rather than to any mental characteristic; for he was not indifferent
to Ben ' s invitation , but blushed and laughed and rubbed his sleeve
over his mouth in a way that was regarded as a symptom of yielding . 
And for some time the company appeared to be much in earnest about the
desire to hear David ' s song . But in vain . The lyrism of the evening
was in the cellar at present , and was not to be drawn from that
retreat just yet . . . . 




A NOVEL POSTMAN[20]

BY ALICE W . WHEILDON . 

 A little country girl made known her wants in a decidedly
 original way . A small boy in the city did his best to
 satisfy them . This is at once a story of Thanksgiving and of
 Christmas . 


 " Oh , mother ! what do you suppose Ellen found in the turkey ? You never
could guess . It ' s a letter--yes , a real letter just stuffed
inside--see ! " And Freddie held before his mother ' s wondering eyes a
soiled and crumpled envelope which seemed to contain a letter . 

[ 20: From _Wideawake_ , November , 1889 . Lothrop , Lee & Shepard
Company . ]

Freddie had been in the kitchen all the morning watching the various
operations for the Thanksgiving dinner which was  " to come off " the
next day , when all the  " sisters , cousins , and aunts " of the family
were to assemble , as was their custom each year , and great was the
commotion in the kitchen and much there was for Master Fred to
inspect . When Ellen put her hand into the turkey to arrange him for
the stuffing , great was her astonishment at finding a piece of paper . 
Drawing it quickly out she called ,  " Freddie , Freddie , see here ! See
what I ' ve found in the turkey ! I declare if he isn ' t a new kind of a
postman , for sure as you ' re born this is a letter , come from
somewhere , in the turkey . My ! who ever heard of such a thing ? " 

Freddie , standing with eyes and mouth wide open , finally said ,  " Why , 
Ellen , do you believe it is a letter ? " 

 " Why , of course it is ! Don ' t you see it ' s in a ' envelope and all
sealed and everything ? " 

 " Yes , but it hasn ' t any stamp and how could a turkey bring it--how did
it get in him ? " 

 " Oh , " laughed Ellen ,  " that ' s the question ! You ' d better take it right
up to your mother and get her to read it to you and perhaps it will
tell . " 

So Freddie , all excitement , rushed upstairs and into his mother ' s
room , shouting as we have read . 

His mother took the letter from him .  " Where did you get this , 
Freddie--what do you mean by finding it in the turkey ? " 

 " Why , Ellen found it in the turkey when she was fixing him , and I
don ' t see how it got there . " 

Mrs . Page turned the envelope and slowly read ,  " To the lady who buys
this turkey , " written with a pencil and in rather crooked letters on
the outside; then opening the envelope she found , surely enough , a
letter within , also written in pencil , in rather uncertain letters , 
some large , some quite small , some on the line , others above or below , 
but all bearing sufficient relation to one another for her finally to
decipher the following:

_Nov . 20_ , 

_Mad River Village , N . H . _

 dere lady I doo want a dol for Christmas orful and mother
 says that Sante Claws is so busy in the city that she gueses
 he forgits the cuntry and for me to rite to the city lady
 who buys our turkey and ask her if she will pleas to ask
 Sante Claws if he could send a dol way up here in the cuntry
 to me . I will hang my stockin in the chimly and he cannot
 mistake the house becaus it is the only house that is black
 in the hole place . I have prayed to him lots of times to
 give me a dol but I gues he does not mind prayers much from
 a little girl so far away so will you pleas to ask him for
 me and oblige

LUCY TILLAGE . 

 P . S . --I hope the turkey will be good to eat , he is our very
 best one and I was sorry to have him killed , but I never had
 a dol . 

Freddie listened , very much interested , sometimes helping to make out
the letters while his mother read this remarkable letter . At its
conclusion he dropped upon a chair in deep thought while in his
imagination he saw a small black house surrounded by turkeys running
wildly about while a little girl tried to catch the largest . 

 " Oh , mother , " at length he sighed ,  " only think of a girl who never had
a doll , and Beth has so many she don ' t know what to do with them
all--shall you ask Santa Claus to send her one ? " 

 " Well , " said Mrs . Page , who also had been in deep thought ,  " do you
think we better ask Santa Claus to send her one , or send her one
ourselves ? You and Beth might send her one for a Christmas present . " 

At once Freddie became fired with the desire to rush to a store , 
purchase a doll , and send it off to the little  " black house . " He
seemed to think the house was little because the girl was little . 

 " No , no , Freddie , not so fast , " said Mrs . Page .  " I think we better
wait till papa comes home and then we will ask his advice about it:
first , if he knows of a town in New Hampshire of this name , and then
if he thinks there may really be a little girl there who has such an
odd name--I shouldn ' t be surprised if Papa could find out all about
her . " 

Freddie thought it was hard to wait until his father came home before
something was done about securing a doll; still he knew his mother was
right and tried to be patient , wishing Beth would come home , wondering
how the little girl looked , and if she had any brothers who wanted
something , and fifty other things , till he heard his father ' s key in
the front door; then down he rushed , flourishing the open sheet in his
hand , and gave him a most bewildering and rapid account of the letter
and the finding it in the turkey , ending with ,  " Now , Papa , do you know
of any such town , and did you ever hear of Lucy Tillage before , or of
anybody ' s turkey having a letter sent in him , and don ' t you think we
might send her the doll right away so ' s she might have it for
Christmas sure--don ' t you , Papa ? And if we can ' t get a new one won ' t
you tell Beth to send one of hers ? I know she won ' t want so many
and-- " 

 " Oh ! stop , my boy , " said Mr . Page , laughing heartily;  " wait a moment , 
Fred , I don ' t half understand what this is all about--a letter and a
turkey and a little girl with a doll and a turkey in a black house-- " 

 " Now , Papa , you ' re getting it all mixed up; you read the letter
yourself , please . " 

So Mr . Page read the letter and heard about finding it in the turkey , 
and then talked it over with his wife and Freddie and Beth , who had
come in from her play , and it was decided that he should write to the
postmaster and minister in Mad River Village asking them if they knew
of any family in the place of the name of Tillage , and if they did , 
whether they were a poor family , and how many children they had , and
anything else they might know of them . 

There was no time to lose if the doll was to be sent for Christmas , so
both letters were written that very evening and Freddie begged to put
them in the post box himself that there might be no mistake in that . 

Then came a long time of waiting for Master Fred . At first he thought
one day would be enough for the letter to find its way to Mad River
Village; but upon a solemn consultation with the cousins and aunts who
came to the Thanksgiving party , it was decided that three days , at
least , ought to be allowed for a letter to reach a place that none of
them had ever heard of , and perhaps there was not such a village
anywhere after all but Freddie had made up his mind that there was
somewhere , and so each morning found him watching for the postman and
each night he went to bed disappointed , saying ,  " Oh ! I hope there is a
truly Mad Village . " 

Beth was almost as much excited as Fred about Lucy ' s letter , but still
she laughed at him as older sisters sometimes seem to take pleasure
in doing , saying ,  " I guess it ' s a delicious wonderland kind of a
letter , and that the people up there are mad people to be sending
letters in turkeys ! " 

 " Well , you just wait , Beth , and see if they are , " answered Fred; and
sure enough , after ten days of waiting Freddie was rewarded by
receiving from the postman a yellow envelope with  " Mad River Village " 
printed in large , clear letters  " right side of the stamp . " He ran as
fast as he could with it to his father , shouting to Beth by the way to
 " come and see if there isn ' t a Mad Village and a Lucy Tillage . " 

Mr . Page was never given so short a time before to open a letter and
adjust his glasses , but then a letter had never before been received
under such circumstances . It proved to be from the postmaster at Mad
River Village , and ran as follows:

Mad River Village , N . H . 

 MR . PAGE of Boston: I rec . your letter a Day or two since
 and hasten to ans . it right away , as you wish , by this
 morning ' s mail which I must put up pretty soon so this
 letter must be short . Yes sir I do know a family in this
 town by the name of Tillage and they ' re a good respectable
 family too . They live a mile or two out of the village on a
 farm his father left him and I guess they have pretty hard
 times making both ends meet--there ain ' t much sale up here
 for farm things , you know , and it costs a heap to send them
 to Boston but they do say that of late he ' s raised lots of
 chickens and turkeys to send to Boston for Thanksgiving . 
 Last year he and his wife started in on taking summer
 boarders and I guess they done first rate . They ' re young
 folks , got three children , a little girl a small boy and a
 baby and I guess they ' ll do as well as any one can on that
 farm , it ' s a likely place but his father ain ' t been dead
 long and Geo . didn ' t have no show while the old man was
 alive . He buys his flour and groceries of me and I call him
 a honest fellow and I guess you ' d like to board with them if
 you want to try them next summer . I don ' t think of anything
 more to say so will close . 

Yours respt . 

JOSIAH SAFFORD . 

 P . S . --His name and address are George Tillage , Intervale
 Farm , Mad River Village , N . H . 

This was a highly satisfactory letter , especially to Master Fred who
had shouted gleefully to Beth ,  " I told you so ! "  " I do know a family of
the name of Tillage , " and when his father read  " three children , a
little girl , etc . , " he nearly turned a somersault in his excitement , 
dancing about and saying ,  " that ' s Lucy ! that ' s Lucy ! " 

Mr . Page turned smilingly to his wife , saying ,  " Well , my dear , this
does not sound so much like a fairy tale after all , and I really think
you and the children must play Santa Claus and send Lucy a doll . " 

 " Oh , yes , Papa , of course we must ! Yes , do , Mamma ! " shouted both
children at once .  " It ' ll be such fun and she won ' t know where it comes
from . " 

Mrs . Page was only too willing , so she promised , only adding that she
hoped the minister would give an equally good account . 

The children , however , were quite satisfied with the postmaster ' s
letter and began preparations the very next morning to secure the doll
and her  " fit out " as Beth called it . First , Beth ' s dolls were looked
at to see if one of them would do to take a trip into the country , but
although there were quite a number of them none seemed to just suit
their ideas of what Lucy ' s doll should be . So Mamma was appealed to
and in consequence a visit was paid to Partridge ' s store by Mrs . Page , 
accompanied by Beth and Master Fred . Here such a bewildering array of
dolls was presented to the children that it was with difficulty they
finally decided upon one with blue eyes and short golden hair , and
real hair that curled bewitchingly . Then came the selection of the
 " fit out . " Freddie thought she should have skates and a watch and
bracelets and one of the cunning waterproof cloaks and a trunk--in
fact , everything that could be bought for a doll  ( and in these days
that means all articles of apparel , whether for use or ornament , that
could be bought for a real person ) ; but Mrs . Page explained that she
would not need so many things in Mad River Village , so he was
contented with a trunk which he selected himself , while his mother and
Beth bought a little hat and cloak , shoes , stockings , and a pretty
sunshade--the dresses and underclothing Beth thought she could make
with the aid of her mother ' s seamstress , and she was very ambitious to
try . 

Freddie thought the  " small boy " and the  " baby " ought to have presents
sent to them also; so he was allowed to select a drum , which he was
sure the boy  " would like best of anything , " and a pretty rattle and a
rubber cow for the baby . 

It was a very busy season of the year for the Pages as well as for
other people , and Beth had many presents to think about , but she kept
the little dresses and clothes for Lucy ' s doll in mind and worked and
planned with a will all the time she could spare for them , and Mary , 
the seamstress , sewed and sewed , and as she knew how to cut dresses as
well as make them , in about two weeks they had , as Beth said ,  " a
lovely fit out , " even to a tiny muff and collar made from some bits of
fur mamma had and a sweet little hood made just like Beth ' s own . 

Then Miss Doll was dressed in her travelling suit , muff and all , her
other dresses and clothing packed in the little trunk , and she herself
carefully tucked in on top , then Beth shut the cover and locked it , 
tying the key to one of the buckles of the side strap--a box had been
procured and into it was packed the trunk , the drum , and the presents
for the baby , supplemented by Freddie with a ball which he had found
among his own playthings and two cornucopias of candy which he had
purchased himself , saying that  " Christmas won ' t be Christmas if they
don ' t have some candy . " Mrs . Page  " filled in the nooks and corners
just to steady the whole , " as she modestly said , with a pair of strong
warm mittens for Mr . Tillage , some magazines and books , several pairs
of long thick stockings which Freddie had outgrown but not worn out , 
and over the whole a beautiful warm shawl . 

Then Beth and Fred composed a letter together which Beth wrote and
they both signed:

 DEAR LUCY TILLAGE:--The turkey brought the letter safely to
 us and we wanted to be Santa Claus ourselves and so send the
 doll and the other things for a Christmas present to you and
 your brother and the baby . 

 We wish you all a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year . 

BETH PAGE , 

FRED PAGE . 

This they neatly folded , put in an envelope addressed to Miss Lucy
Tillage , Mad River Village , and placed on the shawl where it might be
seen the moment the box was opened . They felt very proud and happy
when the box was finally nailed up and directed in clear printed
letters to

GEORGE TILLAGE , 
 Intervale Farm , 
 Mad River Village , 
 New Hampshire . 

Freddie insisted that Lucy ' s name ought to be put on , too , as she was
the one who had written the letter and to whom the box was really
sent; so  " For Lucy " was printed across one corner and underlined that
her father might see it was sent particularly to her . It all seemed so
mysterious , sending presents to people they did not know , and so
delightful , that they thought this the best Christmas they had ever
known and only wished that they could be in the little  " black house " 
when the box was opened , to see Lucy ' s face as she caught sight of the
cunning trunk and then the doll which she had so longed for . 

The very day the box was sent on its way there came a letter from a
minister in the town in which Mad River Village was located , saying
that he  " did not know any family of the name of Tillage , but upon
inquiry he had found that there was a family of that name living on
the other side of the river , but as they did not go to his church he
was not acquainted with them; he was sorry , etc . , etc . " 

But the children cared little for this letter; their faith in Lucy was
not shaken , and they were very happy that they had answered her
letter . 




EZRA ' S THANKSGIVIN ' OUT WEST[21]

BY EUGENE FIELD . 

 A Kansas settler ' s recollections of an old-time Thanksgiving
 in western Massachusetts . Older boys and girls will best
 appreciate the tender sentiment of the picture which Eugene
 Field has painted so vividly by his masterly use of homely
 dialect . 


Ezra had written a letter to the home folks , and in it he had
complained that never before had he spent such a weary , lonesome day
as this Thanksgiving Day had been . Having finished this letter , he sat
for a long time gazing idly into the open fire that snapped cinders
all over the hearthstone and sent its red forks dancing up the chimney
to join the winds that frolicked and gambolled across the Kansas
prairies that raw November night . It had rained hard all day , and was
cold; and although the open fire made every honest effort to be
cheerful , Ezra , as he sat in front of it in the wooden rocker and
looked down into the glowing embers , experienced a dreadful feeling of
loneliness and homesickness . 

[ 21: From  " A Little Book of Profitable Tales , " copyright , 
1889 , published by Charles Scribner ' s Sons . ]

 " I ' m sick o ' Kansas , " said Ezra to himself .  " Here I ' ve been in this
plaguey country for goin ' on a year , and--yes , I ' m sick of it , 
powerful sick of it . What a miser ' ble Thanksgivin ' this has been ! 
They don ' t know what Thanksgivin ' is out this way . I wish I was back
in ol ' Mass ' chusetts--that ' s the country for _me_ , and they hev the
kind o ' Thanksgivin ' I like ! " 

Musing in this strain , while the rain went patter-patter on the
windowpanes , Ezra saw a strange sight in the fireplace--yes , right
among the embers and the crackling flames Ezra saw a strange , 
beautiful picture unfold and spread itself out like a panorama . 

 " How very wonderful ! " murmured the young man . Yet he did not take his
eyes away , for the picture soothed him and he loved to look upon it . 

 " It is a pictur ' of long ago , " said Ezra softly .  " I had like to forgot
it , but now it comes back to me as nat ' ral-like as an ol ' friend . An ' 
I seem to be a part of it , an ' the feelin ' of that time comes back
with the pictur ' , too . " 

Ezra did not stir . His head rested upon his hand , and his eyes were
fixed upon the shadows in the firelight . 

 " It is a pictur ' of the ol ' home , " said Ezra to himself .  " I am back
there in Belchertown , with the Holyoke hills up north an ' the
Berkshire Mountains a-loomin ' up gray an ' misty-like in the western
horizon . Seems as if it wuz early mornin ' ; everything is still , and it
is so cold when we boys crawl out o ' bed that , if it wuzn ' t
Thanksgivin ' mornin ' , we ' d crawl back again an ' wait for Mother to
call us . But it _is_ Thanksgivin ' mornin ' , and we ' re goin ' skatin ' 
down on the pond . The squealin ' o ' the pigs has told us it is five
o ' clock , and we must hurry; we ' re goin ' to call by for the Dickerson
boys an ' Hiram Peabody , an ' we ' ve got to hyper ! Brother Amos gets on
about half o ' my clothes , and I get on  ' bout half o ' his , but it ' s all
the same; they are stout , warm clo ' es , and they ' re big enough to fit
any of us boys--Mother looked out for that when she made  ' em . When we
go downstairs , we find the girls there , all bundled up nice an ' 
warm--Mary an ' Helen an ' Cousin Irene . They ' re going with us , an ' we
all start out tiptoe and quiet-like so ' s not to wake up the ol ' folks . 
The ground is frozen hard; we stub our toes on the frozen ruts in the
road . When we come to the minister ' s house , Laura is standin ' on the
front stoop a-waitin ' for us . Laura is the minister ' s daughter . She ' s
a friend o ' Sister Helen ' s--pretty as a dagerr ' otype , an ' gentle-like
and tender . Laura lets me carry her skates , an ' I ' m glad of it , 
although I have my hands full already with the lantern , the hockies , 
and the rest . Hiram Peabody keeps us waitin ' , for he has overslept
himself , an ' when he comes trottin ' out at last the girls make fun of
him--all except Sister Mary , an ' she sort o ' sticks up for Hiram , an ' 
we ' re all so  ' cute we kind o ' calc ' late we know the reason why . 

 " And now , " said Ezra softly ,  " the pictur ' changes: seems as if I could
see the pond . The ice is like a black lookin ' -glass , and Hiram Peabody
slips up the first thing , an ' down he comes , lickety-split , an ' we all
laugh--except Sister Mary , an ' _she_ says it is very imp ' lite to
laugh at other folks ' misfortunes . Ough ! how cold it is , and how my
fingers ache with the frost when I take off my mittens to strap on
Laura ' s skates ! But , oh , how my cheeks burn ! And how careful I am not
to hurt Laura , an ' how I ask her if that ' s  ' tight enough , ' an ' how she
tells me  ' jist a little tighter ' and how we two keep foolin ' along
till the others hev gone an ' we are left alone ! An ' how quick I get my
_own_ skates strapped on--none o ' your new-fangled skates with springs
an ' plates an ' clamps an ' such , but honest , ol ' -fashioned wooden ones
with steel runners that curl up over my toes an ' have a bright brass
button on the end ! How I strap  ' em and lash  ' em and buckle  ' em on ! An ' 
Laura waits for me an ' tells me to be sure to get  ' em on tight
enough--why , bless me ! after I once got  ' em strapped on , if them
skates hed come off , the feet wud ha ' come with  ' em ! An ' now away we
go--Laura and me . Around the bend--near the medder where Si Barker ' s
dog killed a woodchuck last summer--we meet the rest . We forget all
about the cold . We run races an ' play snap the whip , an ' cut all sorts
o ' didoes , an ' we never mind the pick ' rel weed that is froze in on the
ice an ' trips us up every time we cut the outside edge; an ' then we
boys jump over the air holes , an ' the girls stan ' by an ' scream an ' 
tell us they know we ' re agoin ' to drownd ourselves . So the hours go , 
an ' it is sun-up at last , an ' Sister Helen says we must be gettin ' 
home . When we take our skates off , our feet feel as if they were wood . 
Laura has lost her tippet; I lend her mine , and she kind o ' blushes . 
The old pond seems glad to have us go , and the fire-hangbird ' s nest
in the willer tree waves us good-bye . Laura promises to come over to
our house in the evenin ' , and so we break up . 

 " Seems now , " continued Ezra musingly ,  " seems now as if I could see us
all at breakfast . The race on the pond has made us hungry , and Mother
says she never knew anybody else ' s boys that had such capac ' ties as
hers . It is the Yankee Thanksgivin ' breakfast--sausages an ' fried
potatoes , an ' buckwheat cakes , an ' syrup--maple syrup , mind ye , for
Father has his own sugar bush , and there was a big run o ' sap last
season . Mother says ,  ' Ezry an ' Amos , won ' t you never get through
eatin ' ? We want to clear off the table , fer there ' s pies to make , and
nuts to crack , and laws sakes alive ! The turkey ' s got to be stuffed
yet ! ' Then how we all fly around ! Mother sends Helen up into the attic
to get a squash while Mary ' s makin ' the pie crust . Amos an ' I crack
the walnuts--they call  ' em hickory nuts out in this pesky country of
sagebrush and pasture land . The walnuts are hard , and it ' s all we can
do to crack  ' em . Ev ' ry once ' n a while one on  ' em slips outer our
fingers and goes dancin ' over the floor or flies into the pan Helen is
squeezin ' pumpkin into through the col ' nder . Helen says we ' re
shif ' less an ' good for nothin ' but frivolin ' ; but Mother tells us how
to crack the walnuts so ' s not to let  ' em fly all over the room , an ' 
so ' s not to be all jammed to pieces like the walnuts was down at the
party at the Peasleys ' last winter . An ' now here comes Tryphena
Foster , with her gingham gown an ' muslin apron on; her folks have gone
up to Amherst for Thanksgivin ' , an ' Tryphena has come over to help our
folks get dinner . She thinks a great deal o ' Mother ,  ' cause Mother
teaches her Sunday-school class an ' says Tryphena oughter marry a
missionary . There is bustle everywhere , the rattle uv pans an ' the
clatter of dishes; an ' the new kitchen stove begins to warm up an ' git
red , till Helen loses her wits and is flustered , an ' sez she never
could git the hang o ' that stove ' s dampers . 

 " An ' now , " murmured Ezra gently , as a tone of deeper reverence crept
into his voice ,  " I can see Father sittin ' all by himself in the
parlour . Father ' s hair is very gray , and there are wrinkles on his
honest old face . He is lookin ' through the winder at the Holyoke hills
over yonder , and I can guess he ' s thinkin ' of the time when he wuz a
boy like me an ' Amos , an ' uster climb over them hills an ' kill
rattlesnakes an ' hunt partridges . Or doesn ' t his eyes quite reach the
Holyoke hills ? Do they fall kind o ' lovingly but sadly on the little
buryin ' ground jest beyond the village ? Ah , Father knows that spot , 
an ' he loves it , too , for there are treasures there whose memory he
wouldn ' t swap for all the world could give . So , while there is a kind
o ' mist in Father ' s eyes , I can see he is dreamin ' -like of sweet an ' 
tender things , and a-communin ' with memory--hearin ' voices I never
heard , an ' feelin ' the tech of hands I never pressed; an ' seein ' 
Father ' s peaceful face I find it hard to think of a Thanksgivin ' 
sweeter than Father ' s is . 

 " The pictur ' in the firelight changes now , " said Ezra ,  " an ' seems as
if I wuz in the old frame meetin ' -house . The meetin ' -house is on the
hill , and meetin ' begins at half-pas ' ten . Our pew is well up in
front--seems as if I could see it now . It has a long red cushion on
the seat , and in the hymn-book rack there is a Bible an ' a couple of
Psalmodies . We walk up the aisle slow , and Mother goes in first; then
comes Mary , then me , then Helen , then Amos , and then Father . Father
thinks it is jest as well to have one o ' the girls set in between me
an ' Amos . The meetin ' -house is full , for everybody goes to meetin ' 
Thanksgivin ' Day . The minister reads the proclamation an ' makes a
prayer , an ' then he gives out a psalm , an ' we all stan ' up an ' turn
 ' round an ' join the choir . Sam Merritt has come up from Palmer to
spend Thanksgivin ' with the ol ' folks , an ' he is singin ' tenor to-day
in his ol ' place in the choir . Some folks say he sings wonderful well , 
but _I_ don ' t like Sam ' s voice . Laura sings soprano in the choir , and
Sam stands next to her an ' holds the book . 

 " Seems as if I could hear the minister ' s voice , full of earnestness
an ' melody , comin ' from way up in his little round pulpit . He is
tellin ' us why we should be thankful , an ' , as he quotes Scriptur ' an ' 
Dr . Watts , we boys wonder how anybody can remember so much of the
Bible . Then I get nervous and worried . Seems to me the minister was
never comin ' to lastly , and I find myself wonderin ' whether Laura is
listenin ' to what the preachin ' is about , or is writin ' notes to Sam
Merritt in the back of the tune book . I get thirsty , too , and I
fidget about till Father looks at me , and Mother nudges Helen , and
Helen passes it along to me with interest . 

 " An ' then , " continues Ezra in his revery ,  " when the last hymn is given
out an ' we stan ' up agin an ' join the choir , I am glad to see that
Laura is singin ' outer the book with Miss Hubbard , the alto . An ' goin ' 
out o ' meetin ' I kind of edge up to Laura and ask her if I kin have
the pleasure of seein ' her home . 

 " An ' now we boys all go out on the Common to play ball . The Enfield
boys have come over , and , as all the Hampshire county folks know , they
are tough fellers to beat . Gorham Polly keeps tally , because he has
got the newest jackknife--oh , how slick it whittles the old broom
handle Gorham picked up in Packard ' s store an ' brought along jest to
keep tally on ! It is a great game of ball; the bats are broad and
light , and the ball is small and soft . But the Enfield boys beat us at
last; leastwise they make 70 tallies to our 58 , when Heman Fitts
knocks the ball over into Aunt Dorcas Eastman ' s yard , and Aunt Dorcas
comes out an ' picks up the ball an ' takes it into the house , an ' we
have to stop playin ' . Then Phineas Owen allows he can flop any boy in
Belchertown , an ' Moses Baker takes him up , an ' they wrassle like two
tartars , till at last Moses tuckers Phineas out an ' downs him as slick
as a whistle . 

 " Then we all go home , for Thanksgivin ' dinner is ready . Two long
tables have been made into one , and one of the big tablecloths Gran ' ma
had when she set up housekeepin ' is spread over  ' em both . We all set
round--Father , Mother , Aunt Lydia Holbrook , Uncle Jason , Mary , Helen , 
Tryphena Foster , Amos , and me . How big an ' brown the turkey is , and
how good it smells ! There are bounteous dishes of mashed potato , 
turnip , an ' squash , and the celery is very white and cold , the
biscuits are light and hot , and the stewed cranberries are red as
Laura ' s cheeks . Amos and I get the drumsticks; Mary wants the wishbone
to put over the door for Hiram , but Helen gets it . Poor Mary , she
always _did_ have to give up to  ' rushin ' Helen , ' as we call her . The
pies--oh , what pies Mother makes; no dyspepsia in  ' em , but good nature
an ' good health an ' hospitality ! Pumpkin pies , mince , an ' apple , too , 
and then a big dish of pippins an ' russets an ' bellflowers , an ' , last
of all , walnuts with cider from the Zebrina Dickerson farm ! I tell ye , 
there ' s a Thanksgivin ' dinner for ye ! that ' s what we get in old
Belchertown; an ' that ' s the kind of livin ' that makes the Yankees so
all-fired good an ' smart . 

 " But the best of all , " said Ezra very softly to himself ,  " oh , yes , the
best scene in all the pictur ' is when evenin ' comes , when all the
lamps are lit in the parlour , when the neighbours come in , and when
there is music and singing an ' games . An ' it ' s this part o ' the
pictur ' that makes me homesick now and fills my heart with a longin ' I
never had before; an ' yet it sort o ' mellows and comforts me , too . 
Miss Serena Cadwell , whose beau was killed in the war , plays on the
melodeon , and we all sing--all on us: men , womenfolks , an ' children . 
Sam Merritt is there , and he sings a tenor song about love . The women
sort of whisper round that he ' s goin ' to be married to a Palmer lady
nex ' spring , an ' I think to myself I never heard better singin ' than
Sam ' s . Then we play games--proverbs , buzz , clap-in-clap-out , 
copenhagen , fox-an ' -geese , button-button-who ' s-got-the-button , 
spin-the-platter , go-to-Jerusalem , my-ship ' s-come-in; and all the
rest . The ol ' folks play with the young folks just as nat ' ral as can
be; and we all laugh when Deacon Hosea Cowles hez to measure six yards
of love ribbon with Miss Hepsey Newton , and cut each yard with a kiss;
for the deacon hez been sort o ' purrin ' round Miss Hepsey for goin ' on
two years . Then , aft ' r a while , when Mary and Helen bring in the
cookies , nutcakes , cider , an ' apples , Mother says:  ' I don ' t believe
we ' re goin ' to hev enough apples to go round; Ezry , I guess I ' ll have
to get you to go down cellar for some more . ' Then I says:  ' All right , 
Mother , I ' ll go , providin ' some one  ' ll go along an ' hold the candle . ' 
An ' when I say this I look right at Laura , an ' she blushes . Then
Helen , jest for meanness , says:  ' Ezry , I s ' pose you ain ' t willin ' to
have your fav ' rite sister go down cellar with you and catch her death
o ' cold ? ' But Mary , who hez been showin ' Hiram Peabody the phot ' graph
album for more ' n an hour , comes to the rescue an ' makes Laura take the
candle , and she shows Laura how to hold it so it won ' t go out . 

 " The cellar is warm an ' dark . There are cobwebs all between the
rafters an ' everywhere else except on the shelves where Mother keeps
the butter an ' eggs an ' other things that would freeze in the butt ' ry
upstairs . The apples are in bar ' ls up against the wall , near the
potater bin . How fresh an ' sweet they smell ! Laura thinks she sees a
mouse , an ' she trembles an ' wants to jump up on the pork bar ' l , but I
tell her that there shan ' t no mouse hurt her while I ' m around; and I
mean it , too , for the sight of Laura a-tremblin ' makes me as strong as
one of Father ' s steers .  ' What kind of apples do you like best , Ezry ? ' 
asks Laura ,  ' russets or greenin ' s or crow-eggs or bellflowers or
Baldwins or pippins ? '  ' I like the Baldwins best , ' says I ,  ' ' coz they
got red cheeks just like yours . '  ' Why , Ezry Thompson ! how you talk ! ' 
says Laura .  ' You oughter be ashamed of yourself ! ' But when I get the
dish filled up with apples there ain ' t a Baldwin in all the lot that
can compare with the bright red of Laura ' s cheeks . An ' Laura knows it , 
too , an ' she sees the mouse again , an ' screams , and then the candle
goes out , and we are in a dreadful stew . But I , bein ' almost a man , 
contrive to bear up under it , and knowin ' she is an orph ' n , I comfort
an ' encourage Laura the best I know how , and we are almost upstairs
when Mother comes to the door and wants to know what has kep ' us so
long . Jest as if Mother doesn ' t know ! Of course she does; an ' when
Mother kisses Laura good-bye that night there is in the act a
tenderness that speaks more sweetly than even Mother ' s words . 

 " It is so like Mother , " mused Ezra;  " so like her with her gentleness
an ' clingin ' love . Hers is the sweetest picture of all , and hers the
best love . " 

Dream on , Ezra; dream of the old home with its dear ones , its holy
influences , and its precious inspiration ! --Mother . Dream on in the
faraway firelight; and as the angel hand of memory unfolds these
sacred visions , with thee and them shall abide , like a Divine
Comforter , the spirit of Thanksgiving . 




CHIP ' S THANKSGIVING[22]

BY ANNIE HAMILTON DONNELL . 

 Chip had plenty of nuts on Thanksgiving Day . The little lady
 called Heart ' s Delight saw to that . Can you guess who Chip
 was ? 


They had got  " way through , " as Terry said , to the nuts . It had been a
beautiful Thanksgiving dinner  " so far . " Grandmother ' s sweet face
beamed down the length of the great table , over all the little crinkly
grandheads , at grandfather ' s face . Everybody felt very thankful . 

[ 22: From the _Youth ' s Companion_ , November 26 , 1903 . ]

 " I wish all the children this side o ' the north pole had had some
turkey , too , and squash and cram ' bry--and things , " said Silence
quietly . Silence was always wishing beautiful things like that . 

 " An ' some nuts , " added Terry , setting his small white teeth into the
meat of a big fat walnut .  " It wouldn ' t seem Thanksgivingy  ' thout
nuts . " 

 " I know somebody who would be thankful with just nuts , " smiled
grandfather .  " Indeed , I think he ' d rather have them for all the
courses of his Thanksgiving dinner ! " 

 " Just nuts ! No turkey , nor puddin ' , nor anything ? " 

The crinkly grandheads all bobbed up from their plates and
nut-pickers in amazement . Just nuts ! 

 " Yes . Guess who he is ? " Grandfather ' s laughing eyes twinkled up the
long table at grandmother . 

 " I ' ll give you three guesses apiece , beginning with Heart ' s Delight . 
Guess number one , Heart ' s Delight . " 

 " Chip , " gravely . Heart ' s Delight had guessed it the very first guess . 

 " Chip ! " laughed all the little grand girls and boys . Why , of course ! 
Chip ! He would rather have just nuts for Thanksgiving dinner ! 

 " I wish he had some o ' mine ! " cried Silence . 

 " An ' mine ! " cried Terry; and all the others wished he had some of
theirs . What a Thanksgiving dinner little Chip would have had ! 

 " He ' s got plenty , thank you . " It was the shy little voice of Heart ' s
Delight . A soft pink colour had come into her round cheeks . Everybody
looked at her inquiringly , for how did Heart ' s Delight know Chip had
plenty of nuts ? Then Terry remembered something . 

 " Oh , that ' s where her nuts went to ! " he cried .  " Heart ' s Delight gave
 ' em to Chip ! We couldn ' t think what she ' d done with  ' em all . " 

The pink colour was growing pinker--very pink indeed . 

 " Yes , that ' s where , " said Silence , leaning over to squeeze one of
Heart ' s Delight ' s little hands . And sure enough , it was . In the
beautiful nut month of October , when the children went after their
winter ' s supply of nuts , little Heart ' s Delight had left all her
little rounded heap just where bright-eyed , nut-loving squirrel Chip
would be sure to find them and hurry them away to his winter hole . And
Chip had found them , she was sure , for not one was left when she went
back to see , the next day . 

 " Why , maybe this very minute--right now--Chip ' s cracking his
Thanksgiving dinner ! " Terry laughed . 

 " Same as we are ! Maybe he ' s got to the nut cour--oh , they ' re all nut
courses ! But maybe he ' s sittin ' up to his table with the rest of the
folks , thanksgiving to Heart ' s Delight , " Silence said . 

Heart ' s Delight ' s little shy face nearly hid itself over her plate . 
This was dreadful ! It was necessary to change the subject at once , and
a dear little thought came to her aid . 

 " But I ' m afraid he hasn ' t got any gran ' father and gran ' mother to his
Thanksgiving , " she said softly .  " I shouldn ' t think anybody could
thanksgive  ' thout a gran ' mother and gran ' father . " 




THE MASTER OF THE HARVEST[23]

BY MRS . ALFRED GATTY . 

 A good old-fashioned story for the older boys and girls to
 read on the Sunday before Thanksgiving Day . 


The Master of the Harvest walked by the side of his cornfields in the
early year , and a cloud was over his face , for there had been no rain
for several weeks , and the earth was hard from the parching of the
cold east winds , and the young wheat had not been able to spring up . 

[ 23: From  " Parables from Nature . " ]

So , as he looked over the long ridges that lay stretched in rows
before him , he was vexed , and began to grumble , and say ,  " The harvest
would be backward , and all things would go wrong . " At the mere thought
of which he frowned more and more , and uttered words of complaint
against the heavens , because there was no rain; against the earth , 
because it was so dry and unyielding; against the corn , because it had
not sprung up . 

And the man ' s discontent was whispered all over the field , and all
along the long ridges where the corn seeds lay; and when it reached
them they murmured out ,  " How cruel to complain ! Are we not doing our
best ? Have we let one drop of moisture pass by unused , one moment of
warmth come to us in vain ? Have we not seized on every chance , and
striven every day to be ready for the hour of breaking forth ? Are we
idle ? Are we obstinate ? Are we indifferent ? Shall we not be found
waiting and watching ? How cruel to complain ! " 

Of all this , however , the Master of the Harvest heard nothing , so the
gloom did not pass away from his face . On the contrary , he took it
with him into his comfortable home , and repeated to his wife the dark
words that all things were going wrong; that the drought would ruin
the harvest , for the corn was not yet sprung . 

And still thinking thus , he laid his head on his pillow , and presently
fell asleep . 

But his wife sat up for a while by the bedside , and opened her Bible , 
and read ,  " The harvest is the end of the world , and the reapers are
the angels . " 

Then she wrote this text in pencil on the flyleaf at the end of the
book , and after it the date of the day , and after the date the words , 
 " Lord , the husbandman , Thou waitest for the precious fruit Thou hast
sown , and hast long patience for it ! Amen , O Lord , Amen ! " 

After which the good woman knelt down to pray , and as she prayed she
wept , for she knew that she was very ill . 

But what she prayed that night was heard only in heaven . 

And so a few days passed on as before , and the house was gloomy with
the discontent of its master; but at last one evening the wind
changed , the sky became heavy with clouds , and before midnight there
was rain all over the land; and when the Master of the Harvest came in
next morning , wet from his early walk by the cornfields , he said it
was well it had come at last , and that , at last , the corn had sprung
up . 

On which his wife looked at him with a smile , and said ,  " How often
things came right , about which one had been anxious and disturbed . " To
which her husband made no answer , but turned away and spoke of
something else . 

Meantime , the corn seeds had been found ready and waiting when the
hour came , and the young sprouts burst out at once; and very soon all
along the long ridges were to be seen rows of tender blades , tinting
the whole field with a delicate green . And day by day the Master of
the Harvest saw them and was satisfied; but because he was satisfied , 
and his anxiety was gone , he spoke of other things , and forgot to
rejoice . 

And a murmur arose among them:  " Should not the Master have welcomed us
to life ? He was angry but lately , because the seed he had sown had not
yet brought forth; now that it has brought forth , why is he not glad ? 
What more does he want ? Have we not done our best ? Are we not doing it
minute by minute , hour by hour , day by day ? From the morning and
evening dews , from the glow of the midday sun , from the juices of the
earth , from the breezes which freshen the air , even from clouds and
rain , are we not taking in food and strength , warmth and life , 
refreshment and joy; so that one day the valleys may laugh and sing , 
because the good seed hath brought forth abundantly ? Why does he not
rejoice ? " 

As before , however , of all they said the Master of the Harvest heard
nothing; and it never struck him to think of the young corn blades ' 
struggling life . Nay , once , when his wife asked him if the wheat was
doing well , he answered ,  " Very fairly , " and nothing more . But she
then , because the evening was fine and the fairer weather had revived
her failing powers , said she would walk out by the cornfields herself . 

And so it came to pass that they went out together . And together they
looked all along the long green ridges of wheat , and watched the
blades as they quivered and glistened in the breeze which sprang up
with the setting sun . Together they walked , together they looked;
looking at the same things and with the same human eyes; even as they
had walked , and looked , and lived together for years , but with a world
dividing their hearts; and what was ever to unite them ? 

Even then , as they moved along , she murmured half aloud , half to
herself , thinking of the anxiety that had passed away:  " Thou visitest
the earth , and blessest it; thou makest it very plenteous . " 

To which he answered , if answer it may be called ,  " Why are you always
so gloomy ? Why should Scripture be quoted about such common things ? " 

And she looked in his face and smiled , but did not speak; and he
could not read the smile , for the life of her heart was as hidden to
him as the life of the corn blades in the field . 

And so they went home together , no more being said by either; for , as
she turned round , the sight of the setting sun and of the young
freshly growing wheat blades brought tears into her eyes . 

_She_ might never see the harvest upon earth again; for her that other
was at hand , whereof the reapers were to be angels . 

And when she opened her Bible that night she wrote on the flyleaf the
text she had quoted to her husband , and after the text the date of the
day , and after the date the words ,  " Bless me , even me also , oh , my
Father , that I may bring forth fruit with patience ! " 

Very peaceful were the next few weeks that followed , for all nature
seemed to rejoice in the weather , and the corn blades shot up till
they were nearly two feet high , and about them the Master of the
Harvest had no complaints to make . 

But at the end of that time , behold , the earth began to be hard and
dry again , for once more rain was wanted; and by degrees the growing
plants failed for want of moisture and nourishment , and lost power and
colour , and became weak and yellow in hue . And once more the
husbandmen began to fear and tremble , and once more the brow of the
Master of the Harvest was over-clouded with angry apprehension . 

And as the man got more and more anxious about the fate of his crops , 
he grew more and more irritable and distrustful , and railed as before , 
only louder now , against the heavens because there was no rain;
against the earth because it lacked moisture; against the corn plants
because they had waxed feeble . 

Nay , once , when his sick wife reproved him gently , praying him to
remember how his fears had been turned to joy before , he reproached
her in his turn for sitting in the house and pretending to judge of
what she could know nothing about , and bade her come out and see for
herself how all things were working together for ill . 

And although he spoke it in bitter jest , and she was very ill , she
said she would go , and went . 

So once more they walked out together , and once more looked over the
cornfields; but when he stretched out his arm and pointed to the long
ridges of blades , and she saw them shrunken and faded in hue , her
heart was grieved within her , and she turned aside and wept over them . 

Nevertheless , she said she durst not cease from hope , since an hour
might renew the face of the earth , if God so willed; neither should
she dare to complain , _even the harvest were to fail_ . At which words
the Master of the Harvest stopped short , amazed , to look at his wife , 
for her soul was growing stronger as her body grew weaker , and she
dared to say things now which she would have had no courage to utter
before . 

But of all this he knew nothing , and what he thought , as he listened , 
was that she was as weak in mind as in body; and what he said was that
a man must be an idiot who would not complain when he saw the bread
taken from under his very eyes ! 

And his murmurings and her tears sent a shudder all along the long
ridges of sickly corn blades , and they asked one of another ,  " Why does
he murmur ? and , Why does she weep ? Are we not doing all we can ? Do we
slumber or sleep , and let opportunities pass by unused ? Are we not
watching and waiting against the times of refreshing ? Shall we not be
found ready at last ? Why does he murmur ? and , Why does she weep ? Is
she , too , fading and waiting ? Has she , too , a master who has lost
patience ? " 

Meantime , when she opened her Bible that night , she wrote on the
flyleaf the text ,  " Wherefore should a man complain , a man for the
punishment of his sins ? " and after the text the date of the day , and
after the date the words ,  " Thou dost turn Thy face from us , and we are
troubled; but , Lord , how long , how long ? " 

And by and by came on the long-delayed times of refreshing , but so
slowly and imperfectly that the change in the corn could scarcely be
detected for a while . Nevertheless , it told at last , and stems
struggled up among the blades , and burst forth into flowers , which
gradually ripened into ears of grain . But a struggle it had been , and
continued to be , for the measure of moisture was scant , and the due
amount of warmth in the air was wanting . Nevertheless , by struggling
and effort the young wheat advanced , little by little , in growth;
preparing itself , minute by minute , hour by hour , day by day , as best
it could , for the great day of the harvest . As best it could ! Would
the Master of the Harvest ask more ? Alas ! he had still something to
find fault with , for when he looked at the ears and saw that they were
small and poor , he grumbled , and said the yield would be less than it
ought to be , and the harvest would be bad . 

And as more weeks went on , and the same weather continued , and the
progress was very , very slow , he spoke out of his vexation to his wife
at home , to his friends at the market , and to the husbandmen who
passed by and talked with him about the crops . 

And the voice of his discontent was breathed over the cornfield , all
along the long ridges where the plants were labouring , and waiting , 
and watching . And they shuddered and murmured:  " How cruel to complain ! 
Had we been idle , had we been negligent , had we been indifferent , we
might have passed away without bearing fruit at all . How cruel to
complain ! " 

But of all this the Master of the Harvest heard nothing , so he did not
cease to complain . 

Meantime , another week or two went on , and people as they glanced over
the land wished that a few good rainy days would come and do their
work decidedly , so that the corn ears might fill . And behold , while
the wish was yet on their lips , the sky became charged with clouds , 
darkness spread over the country , a wild wind rose , and the growling
of thunder announced a storm . And such a storm ! People hid from it in
cellars and closets and dark corners , as if now , for the first time , 
they believed in a God , and were trembling at the new-found fact; as
if they could never discover Him in His sunshine and blessings , but
only thus in His tempests and wrath . 

And all along the long ridges of wheat plants drove the rain-laden
blast , and they bent down before it and rose up again , like the waves
of a labouring sea . Ears over ears they bowed down; ears above ears
they rose up . They bowed down as if they knew that to resist was
destruction; they rose up as if they had a hope beyond the storm . Only
here and there , where the whirlwinds were the strongest , they fell
down and could not lift themselves again . So the damage done was but
little , and the general good was great . But when the Master of the
Harvest saw here and there patches of overweighted corn yet dripping
from the thunder showers , he grew angry for them , and forgot to think
of the long ridges that stretched over his fields , where the corn ears
were swelling and rejoicing . 

And he came in gloomy to his home , when his wife was hoping that now , 
at last , all would be well; and when she looked at him the tumult of
her soul grew beyond control , and she knelt down before him as he sat
moody in his chair , and threw her arms round him , and cried out:  " It
is of the Lord ' s mercies that we are not utterly consumed . Oh , 
husband ! pray for the corn and for me , that it may go well with us at
the last ! Carry me upstairs ! " And his anger was checked by fear , and
he carried her upstairs and laid her on the bed , and said it must be
the storm which had shaken her nerves . But whether he prayed for
either the corn or her that night she never knew . 

And presently came a new distress: for when the days of rain had
accomplished their gracious work , and every one was satisfied , behold , 
they did not cease . And as hitherto the cry had gone up for water on
the furrows , so now men ' s hearts failed them for fear lest it should
continue to overflowing , and lest mildew should set in upon the full , 
rich ears , and the glorious crops should be lost . 

And the Master of the Harvest walked out by his cornfields , his face
darker than ever . And he railed against the rain because it would not
cease; against the sun because it would not shine; against the wheat
because it might perish before the harvest . 

 " But why does he always and only complain ? " moaned the corn plants , as
the new terror was breathed over the field .  " Have we not done our best
from the first ? And has not mercy been with us , sooner or later , all
along ? When moisture was scant , and we throve but little , why did he
not rejoice over that little , and wait , as we did , for more ? Now that
abundance has come , and we swell triumphant in strength and in hope , 
why does he not share our joy in the present , and wait in trust , as we
do , for the future ripening change ? Why does he always complain ? Has
he himself some hard master , who would fain reap where he has not
sown , and gather where he has not strewed , and who has no pity for his
servants who strive ? " 

But of all this the Master of the Harvest heard nothing . And when the
days of rain had rolled into weeks and the weeks into months , and the
autumn set in , and the corn still stood up green in the ridges , as if
it never meant to ripen at all , the boldest and most hopeful became
uneasy , and the Master of the Harvest despaired . 

But his wife had risen no more from her bed , where she lay in sickness
and suffering , yet in patient trust , watching the sky through the
window that faced her pillow , looking for the relief that came at
last . For even at the eleventh hour , when hope seemed almost over , and
men had half learned to submit to their expected trial , the dark days
began to be varied by a few hours of sunshine; and though these passed
away , and the gloom and rain returned again , yet they also passed away
in their turn , and the sun shone out once more . 

And the poor sick wife , as she watched , said to those around her that
the weather was gradually changing , and that all would come right at
last; and sighing a prayer that it might be so with herself also , she
had her Bible brought to the bed , and wrote in the flyleaf the text , 
 " Some thirty , some sixty , some an hundredfold " ; and after the text the
date of the day , for on that day the sun had been shining steadily for
many hours . And after the date the words ,  " Unto whom much is given , 
of him shall much be required; yet if Thou , Lord , be extreme to mark
iniquity , O Lord , who may stand ? " 

And day by day , the hours of sunshine were more in number , and the
hours of rain and darkness fewer , and by degrees the green corn ears
ripened into yellow , and the yellow turned into gold , and the harvest
was ready , and the labourers not wanting . And the bursting corn broke
out into songs of rejoicing , and cried ,  " At least we have not waited
and watched in vain ! Surely goodness and mercy have followed us all
the days of our life , and we are crowned with glory and honour . Where
is the Master of the Harvest , that he may claim his own with joy ? " 

But the Master of the Harvest was bending over the bed of his dying
wife . 

And she whispered that her Bible should be brought , and he brought it , 
and she said ,  " Open it at the flyleaf at the end , and write ,  ' It is
sown in corruption , it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in
dishonour , it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness , it is raised
in power; it is sown a natural body , it is raised a spiritual body ! ' " 
And she bade him add the date of the day , and after the date of the
day , the words ,  " O Lord , in Thy mercy say of me--She hath done what
she could ! " And then she laid her hand in his , and so fell asleep in
hope . 

And the harvest of the earth was gathered into barns , and the
gathering-day of rejoicing was over , and the Master of it all sat
alone by his fireside , with his wife ' s Bible on his knee . And he read
the texts and the dates and the prayers , from the first day when the
corn seeds were held back by drought; and as he read a new heart
seemed to burst out within him from the old one--a heart which the
Lord of the other Harvest was making soft , and the springing whereof
He would bless . 

And henceforth , in his going out and coming in from watching the
fruits of the earth , the texts and the dates and the prayers were ever
present in his mind , often rising to his lips; and he murmured and
complained no more , let the seasons be what they would and his fears
however great; for the thought of the late-sprung seed in his own dry
cold heart , and of the long suffering of Him who was Lord and Master
of all , was with him night and day . And more and more as he prayed for
help , that the weary struggle might be blessed , and the new-born
watching and waiting not be in vain , so more and more there came over
his spirit a yearning for that other harvest , where he and she who had
gone before might be gathered in together . 

And thus--in one hope of their calling--the long-divided hearts were
united at last . 




A THANKSGIVING DINNER[24]

BY EDNA PAYSON BRETT . 

 Ministers ' sons , somehow , have a bad reputation . Little
 Johnnie was one and he thought it pretty hard to have to go
 to church on Thanksgiving Day . But the pink-frosted cakes--


 " Oh , dear ! " puffed a certain little boy one bright Thanksgiving
morning , as he jerked his chubby neck into the stiffest of white
collars .  " Great fun , isn ' t it , having to sit up in meeting for a
couple of hours straight as a telegraph pole when I might be playing
football and beating the Haddam team all to hollow ! This is what comes
of your pa ' s being the minister , I s ' pose . " 

[ 24: From the _Youth ' s Companion_ , November 29 , 1900 . ]

But Johnnie , for that was his name , continued his dressing , the ten
years of his young life having taught him how useless it is to make a
fuss over what has to be done . 

In a few minutes he had finished , and was quite satisfied with his
appearance , but for his shoes . These he eyed for a moment , and
concluding that they would not pass inspection , started for the
woodshed to give them a shine . 

On his way he passed the open dining-room door , and suddenly halted . 
 " Oh ! Why can ' t I have a nice little lunch during sermon time ? " 

He took a step back and peeped slyly into the room; then stole across
to the old-fashioned cupboard , stealthily opening the doors , and such
an array of good things you never beheld ! Sally was the best cook in
Brockton any day , but on Thanksgiving she could work wonders . 

He looked with longing eyes from one dish to another . Now the big pies
were out of the question , and the cranberry tarts--he felt of them
lovingly--but no , they were altogether too sticky . He stood on tiptoe
to see what was on the second shelf . To his delight he found a platter
filled with just the daintiest little pink-frosted cakes you ever saw . 

 " O-oo , thimble cakes ! " he exclaimed .  " You are just the fellows I want ! 
I ' ll take you along to church with me . " He cast one quick glance
around , then grabbed a handful of the tiny cakes and crammed them into
his trousers ' pocket . 

 " Lucky for me ma isn ' t going to meeting to-day , " chuckled the naughty
boy ,  " and I don ' t believe grandma ' d ever tell on me if I carried along
the turkey ! " 

The early bell had now begun to ring , and Johnnie started for the
village church . 

 " Come , my son , " said Doctor Goodwin , as they entered the
meeting-house ,  " you are to sit in the front seat with grandma this
morning: she is particularly anxious to hear every word of the sermon
to-day . And where ' s your contribution , boy ? You haven ' t forgotten
that ? " 

 " No , sir , " meekly answered Johnnie ,  " it ' s tied up in my handkerchief . " 
But his heart sank--the front seat ! How ever was his lunch to come in
now ? 

The opening hymn had been sung , the prayer of thanksgiving offered , 
and now , as the collection was about to be taken , the pastor begged
his people to be especially generous to the poor on this day . 

Up in the front pew sat Johnnie , but never a word of the notice did he
hear , so busy was he planning out his own little affair . It wasn ' t
such easy planning either , just supposing he got caught ! 

But what was that ? Johnnie jumped as if he had been struck . However , 
it was nothing but the money plate under his nose , and the good Deacon
Simms standing calmly by . 

To the guilty boy it seemed as if the deacon must have been waiting
for ten minutes at the least , and in a great flurry he began to fumble
for his handkerchief . What _had_ he done with it ? Oh , there it was at
last , way down in the depths of his right trousers ' pocket . 

He caught hold of the knotted corner , and out came the handkerchief
with a whisk and a flourish , and scatter , rattle , helter-skelter , out
flew a half-dozen pink thimble cakes , down upon the floor , back into
Mrs . Smiley ' s pew , and to Johnnie ' s horror one pat into the deacon ' s
plate ! 

The good man ' s eyes tried not to twinkle as he removed the unusual
offering , and passed on more quickly than was his wont . 

Miserable Johnnie , with his face as red as a rooster ' s comb and eyes
cast down in shame , saw nothing but the green squares on the carpet
and the dreadful pink-frosted cakes . He was sure that every one in the
church was glaring at him; probably even grandma had forsaken him , and
each moment he dreaded--he knew not what . 

To his surprise , the service seemed to go right on as usual . Another
hymn was sung , and then there was a general settling down for the
sermon . Very soon he began to grow tired of just gazing at the floor , 
yet he dared not look up , and by and by the heavy eyes drooped and
Johnny was fast asleep . 

All was now quiet in the meeting-house save the calm , steady voice of
the preacher . Pretty soon a wee creature dressed all in soft brown
stole across the floor of a certain pew . She was a courageous little
body indeed , but what mother would not venture a good deal for her
hungry babies ? Such a repast as this was certainly the opportunity of
a lifetime . Looking cautiously around , then concluding that all was
safe , she disappeared down a hole in a corner way under the seat . In a
twinkling she was back again; this time , however , she was not alone . 
Four little ones pattered after Mamma Mouse , and eight bright eyes
spied a dinner worth running for . 

Never mind what they did; but when Johnnie awoke at the strains of
the closing hymn and tried to remember what had gone wrong , he saw
nothing of the pink-frosted cakes save some scattered crumbs . 

What could have become of them , he thought , in bewilderment . 

He hardly knew how he got out of the church that day , but he found
himself rushing down the road a sadder and a wiser boy . Grandma and
papa had remained to chat . Johnnie did not feel like chatting to-day . 

When he reached the house he did not go in , but out to the hayloft , 
his favourite resort in time of trouble . When the dinner bell sounded , 
notwithstanding the delicious Thanksgiving odours which had been
wafted even to the barn , it was an unwelcome summons; yet go he must , 
and walking sheepishly into the dining-room , he slunk into his chair . 

 " Well , John , " said his father , as he helped him to turkey ,  " I
understand that you did not forget the poor to-day . Eh , my son ? " 

 " The poor ? " What could he mean ? Johnnie was too puzzled to speak . 

Then his father went on to tell how little Mrs . Mouse and her babies
had nibbled a wondrous dinner of pink thimble cakes on the floor of
pew number one while Johnnie slept . Grandma and Mrs . Smiley had told
him all about it on the way home; besides , he had seen enough himself
from the pulpit . 

Johnny bravely bore the laugh at his expense , and as the merriment
died away heaved a deep sigh of relief , and exclaimed ,  " Well , I ' m
glad somebody had a feast , even if it wasn ' t the fellow  ' twas meant
for ! Humph , _ ' twas_ quite a setup for poor church mice , wasn ' t it ? But
they needn ' t be looking for another next year . You don ' t catch me
trying that again--no-sir-ee ! " 

