Once upon a time, while riding, a brave, young prince dashed merrily
ahead of his friends, and after galloping across a ploughed field,
turned his horse's head down a grassy road leading to a wood. For some
time he cantered easily along, expecting any moment to hear the shouts
and halloos of his friends following after; but they by mistake took
quite another road, and no sound except the pounding of his courser's
hoofs reached the Prince's ear. Suddenly an ugly snarl and a short bark
broke the stillness of the pleasant forest, and looking down, the Prince
saw a gray wolf snapping at his horse's heels.

Though the horse, wild with fear, threatened to run away any instant,
the Prince leaned over and struck the wolf with his whip.

Hardly had he done so, when an angry voice cried, "How dare you strike
my pet?
A little distance ahead, a wicked old witch stood at one side of the
road. With its tail between its legs, the wolf cowered close to her
skirts, and showed its long yellow fangs.

"Pet, indeed!" cried the Prince. "Keep him away from my horse or I will
strike him again.
"At your peril, Prince," answered the witch. And then, as the Prince
turned his horse's head and galloped back, she called out, "You shall
rue this day! You shall rue this day!
Now by the time the Prince had arrived at the ploughed field and the
great road again, his friends had galloped on so far that they were lost
to sight. Thinking that he might overtake them by following a shorter
road, he turned down a byway skirting the wood in which he had
encountered the enchantress. Presently he began to feel very thirsty.
Chancing to see an old peasant woman in the fields, the Prince called to
her and asked where he could find a roadside spring.

Now this old peasant woman was the wicked witch under another form.
Overjoyed at having the Prince fall so easily into her power, she
curtsied; and replied that within the wood was to be found the finest
spring in the country. Anxious not to lose time, the Prince begged her
to lead him to the water. Little did he know that the witch was leading
him back into the wood, and that she had just bewitched the water!

When they arrived at the pool, the Prince dismounted, and kneeling by
the brim, made a cup of his hands and drank till his thirst was
satisfied. He was just about to seize his horse again by the bridle and
put his foot into the stirrup, when a terrible pang shot through his
body, darkness swam before his eyes, his arms lengthened and became
branches, his fingers, twigs; his feet shot into the ground, and he
found himself turned into a giant elm.

A giant elm he was; a giant elm he remained. Unable to find him after a
long search, his friends gave him up for lost, and a new Prince ruled
over the land. Though the elm tried many times to tell passers-by of his
plight, none ever seemed to understand his words. Again and again, when
simple wood-cutters ventured into the great dark wood, he would tell
them his story and cry out, "I am the Prince! I am the Prince!" But the
wood-cutters heard only the wind stirring in the branches. Ah, how cold
it was in winter when the skies were steely black and the giant stars
sparkled icily! And how pleasant it was when spring returned, and the
gossipy birds came back again!

The first year a pair of wood-pigeons took to housekeeping in his
topmost branches. The Prince was glad to welcome them, for though denied
human speech, he understood the language of trees and birds. On
Midsummer Eve, the pigeons said to him, "To-night the King of the Trees
comes through the wood. Do you not hear the stir in the forest? All the
real trees are preparing for the King's coming; they are shedding dead
leaves and shaking out their branches.
"Tell me of the King," said the Prince.

"He is tall and dark and strong," said the doves. "He dwells in a great
pine in the North. On Midsummer Eve, he goes through the world to see if
all is well with the tree people.
"Do you think he can help me?" asked the Prince.

"You might ask him," replied the doves.

The long, long twilight of Midsummer Eve came to a close; night folded
the world beneath its starry curtains. At twelve o'clock, though not a
breath of air was stirring, the trees were shaken as if by a mighty
wind, the rustling of the leaves blending into strange and lovely music,
and presently the King of the Trees entered the haunted wood. Even as
the wood-doves had said, he was tall and dark and stately.

"Is all well with you, O my people?" said the King, in a voice as sweet
and solemn as the wind in the branches on a summer's day.

"Yes, all is well," answered the trees softly. Though some replied, "I
have lost a branch"; and a little tree called out unhappily, "My
neighbors are shutting out all my sunlight.
"Then fare ye well, my people, till next Midsummer Eve," said the
stately King. And he was about to stride onward through the dark wood
when the enchanted Prince called aloud to him!

"Stay, O King of the Trees," cried the poor Prince. "Hear me even though
I am not of your people. I am a mortal, a prince, and a wicked witch has
turned me into a tree. Can you not help me?
"Alas, poor friend, I can do nothing," replied the King. "However, do
not despair. In my travels through the world, I shall surely find
someone who can help you. Look for me on next Midsummer Eve.
So the great elm swayed his branches sadly, and the King went on his
way.

The winter came again, silent and dark and cold. At the return of
spring, a maiden who dwelt with a family of wood-cutters came often to
rest in the shade of the great tree. Her father had once been a rich
merchant, but evil times had overtaken him, and at his death the only
relatives who could be found to take care of the little girl were a
family of rough wood-cutters in the royal service. These grudging folk
kept the poor maiden always hard at work and gave her the most difficult
household tasks. The Prince, who knew the whole story, pitied her very
much, and ended by falling quite in love with her. As for the unhappy
maiden, it seemed to her that beneath the sheltering shade of the great
elm she enjoyed a peace and happiness to be found nowhere else.

Now it was the custom of the wood-men to cut down, during the summer,
such trees as would be needed for the coming winter, and one day the
wood-cutter in whose family the maiden dwelt announced his intention of
cutting down the great elm.

"Not the great elm which towers above all the forest?" cried the maiden.

"Yes, that very tree," answered the woodcutter gruffly. "To-morrow
morning we shall fell it to the ground, and to-morrow night we shall
build the midsummer fire with its smaller branches. What are you crying
about, you silly girl?
"Oh, please don't cut the great elm!" begged the good maiden.

"Nonsense!" said the wood-cutter. "I wager you have been wasting your
time under its branches. I shall certainly cut the tree down in the
morning.
All night long, you may be sure, the maiden pondered on the best way to
save the great tree; and since she was as clever as she was good, she at
length hit upon a plan. Rising early on Midsummer Morn, she ran to the
forest, climbed the great elm, and concealed herself in its topmost
branches. She saw the rest of the wood beneath her, and the distant
peaks of the Adamant Mountains; and she rejoiced in the dawn songs of
the birds.

An hour after the sun had risen, she heard the voices of the wood-cutter
and his men as they came through the wood. Soon the band arrived at the
foot of the tree. Imagine the feelings of the poor Prince when he saw
the sharp axes at hand to cut him down!

"I shall strike the first blow," said the chief wood-cutter, and he
lifted his axe in the air.

Suddenly from the tree-top a warning voice sang,--

 "Throw the axe down, harm not me.
 I am an enchanted tree.
 He who strikes shall breathe his last,
 Before Midsummer Eve hath passed.
"There is a spirit in the tree," cried the woodcutters, thoroughly
frightened. "Let us hurry away from here before it does us a mischief.And in spite of all the chief wood-cutter's remonstrances, they ran
away as fast as their legs could carry them.

The chief wood-cutter, however, was bolder-hearted, and lifted the axe
again. As the blade shone uplifted in the sun, the maiden sang once
more,--

 "Throw the axe down, harm not me.
 I am an enchanted tree.
 He who strikes shall breathe his last
 Before Midsummer Eve hath passed.
Hearing the voice again, the chief began to feel just the littlest bit
alarmed; nevertheless, he stood his ground and lifted the axe a third
time. Once more the girl sang,--

 "Throw the axe down, harm not me.
 I am an enchanted tree.
 He who strikes shall breathe his last
 Before Midsummer Eve hath passed.
At the same moment, the elm managed to throw down a great branch which
struck the rogue a sound thump on the shoulders. Now thoroughly
terrified, the chief wood-cutter himself fled from the spot.

All day long, for fear lest he return, the maiden remained hidden in the
tree. At twilight, overcome by weariness, she fell into a deep sleep.
Just before midnight, alas, she was awakened from her slumber by hearing
an angry voice cry,--

"Come down from the tree, wicked, deceitful girl, or I shall cut it down
at once!
Very much alarmed, the poor maiden looked down through the branches, and
discovered the wood-cutter standing at the foot of the elm. A lantern
swung from his left hand, and his sharpest axe rested on his right
shoulder. He had returned home, and not finding the maiden there, had
suspected that it was her voice which had frightened his men away.

"Come down," roared the rascal. "I'll teach you, you minx, to play
tricks with me. One--two--three." And lifting the axe in the air, he was
about to send it crashing into the trunk of the elm, when the mysterious
murmur which heralded the coming of the King of the Trees sounded
through the wood. Perplexed and frightened again, the chief wood-cutter
let fall his axe. Presently he perceived two beings coming toward him
through the solemn forest. Uttering a howl of fear, the rogue would have
fled, but, lifting his wand, the elder of the newcomers transfixed him
to the spot. The two personages were the King of the Trees and his
friend, the mighty enchanter, Gorbodoc.

"Descend and fear not, maiden," said the King of the Trees. "You have
done bravely and well. Your misfortunes are over, and a happier day is
at hand.
So the brave girl hurried down the tree, and stood before the enchanter
and the King. Very pretty she was, too, in her rustic dress and ribbons.

Lifting his wand with great solemnity, Gorbodoc touched the trunk of the
elm. There was a blinding flash of rosy fire; the great tree appeared to
shrink and dissolve, and presently the Prince stood before them.

"Welcome, Prince," said the enchanter.

"Your enemy, the witch, will trouble you no more. I have turned her into
an owl and given her to the Queen of Lantern Land. As for you," and here
the enchanter turned fiercely upon the wood-cutter, "you shall be a
green monkey, until you have planted and brought to full growth as many
trees as you have cut down.
An instant later, a green monkey swung off into the tree-tops.

Then the grateful Prince thanked the King of the Trees, the mighty
Gorbodoc, and the brave maiden, with all his heart. I am glad to say
that he got his castle back again and married the maiden who had saved
his life, and they lived happily ever after.



 THE BIRD BOY

Late one autumn night a young queen stood by her window, gazing upon the
silent and deserted meadows gleaming in the moonlight. Suddenly, far,
far up in the sky, she heard the weird cry of birds flying southward,
and lifting her eyes, the Queen beheld bird after bird fly across the
golden shield of the moon.

"Oh, lovely, happy birds," said she; "would that I might have a son with
wings!
Now it came to pass that before the harvest moon rose again over the
land, the Queen became the mother of a little boy who was born with
wings on his shoulders. But instead of being pleased with so strange and
wonderful a little son, the King (who was very superstitious and under
the domination of wicked chamberlain named Malefico) took it into his
head that his wife was a sorceress, and gave orders that she should be
imprisoned in a lonely tower and the child destroyed. So the Queen and
her baby were taken to an old and gloomy tower on a great rock
overlooking the northern sea; and after they had been there a day or
two, the chief jailer came to the Queen's room to take the child and
kill him.
 Every year, on the Bird-Boy's birthday, a great gray bird was seen.

The Queen, when she heard this terrible order, uttered a gasping scream,
and seizing her little son from out his cradle, pressed him close to her
breast. But although she fought for her baby with all her might, the
rude strength of the jailers prevailed, and the child was torn from its
mother's arms. Then, before anyone could prevent her, the poor Queen
beat open the rotted fastening of an old casement window, sprang upon
the ledge, and giving one last look of love and tenderness to her
unhappy child, leaped down into the sea surging and pounding over the
rocks hundreds of feet below. She certainly would have been dashed to
pieces, had not a good spirit of the ocean taken pity on her, and
changed her into a great gray bird. Crying mournfully, the bird circled
the old tower thrice, and disappeared over the white-capped waters.

In spite of his roughness, however, the jailer was neither a brutal nor
a wicked man, and he did not relish the cruel task which the King had
given him. So, instead of killing the bird-boy, he carried him many
leagues back into the dark forest which bordered the sea, and gave him
to a family of charcoal-burners. With these rough, good people the
bird-boy lived till he was five years old. And every year, on the boy's
birthday, a great gray bird came flying over the forest from the distant
ocean, circled thrice the charcoal-burners' hut, and disappeared again,
crying mournfully.

One midsummer day, with a great deal of merry hallooing and blowing of
sweet-voiced horns, the King of the country, accompanied by his young
wife, came hunting through the wood. There was a pretty spring near the
door of the hut, and the party came to a halt at its edge. Out ran the
winged boy and his two little foster-brothers, to see the wonderful
sight. And a wonderful sight it was, indeed, to see the horses tossing
their jeweled bridles, the hooded falcons riding on the saddlebow,
clutching the leather with their curving claws, the merry young pages in
their dark suits, and all the gay company in rich attire.

"Why, see," said the young Queen to her husband, "yon little boy hath
wings. Really, dear, I must have him for my page. Would n't it be
wonderful to have a winged page? Besides, he will be a playmate for
Rosabella.
So the King gave the charcoal-burner and his wife fifty pieces of bright
gold, which pleased them very much, and the charcoal-burner himself
lifted the bird-boy up in his arms, and placed him on the King's saddle.
Then the bird-boy waved good-bye to his two little ragged
foster-brothers, who were howling as if their hearts would break, and
rode away with the King. In a few hours the company came to a splendid
castle of shining white stone, standing in beautiful green gardens
running down to the sea. Once at home, the Queen commanded that the
little winged boy be washed and tidied, and his charcoal-burner's rags
replaced with a pretty black velvet suit. You may be sure that, when the
bird-boy was washed and dressed, there was no handsomer, more winning
little boy in all the world.

So the bird-boy became the best beloved playmate of the Queen's only
child, her darling Rosabella. Now, if the bird-boy was the prettiest
little boy in all the world, Rosabella was the prettiest little girl.
Moreover, she had a sweet disposition, which is a gift even more
precious than the gift of beauty. It was a lovely picture to see the
children building toy castles on the floor of the nursery in the castle
tower, the sun streaming on the black-brown hair and silver white wings
of the little boy, and on the golden curls of Rosabella.

Twelve years passed. The bird-boy grew into a handsome lad; Rosabella
into the loveliest of princesses. Twice had the bird-boy saved
Rosabella's life. He had saved her the first time by swooping down and
catching her in his wings just as she was about to tread on a wicked
yellow viper; he had saved her in the same way when she had fallen over
a cliff at the edge of the sea.

Every year, on the bird-boy's birthday, a great gray bird would fly in
from over the sea, circle the castle thrice, and disappear, crying
mournfully.

Now when the bird-boy and Rosabella were in their seventeenth year, it
came to pass that the King was summoned to war. His enemy was no other
than the wicked chamberlain Malefico, who had succeeded to the kingdom
of the bird-boy's father, when that Prince had died some years before.
So the good King, who had been a real father to the bird-boy, put on his
shining armor, kissed his dear wife and child good-bye, and rode off to
the battlefield. The bird-boy begged and pleaded to be taken with him as
his squire, but the King would not hear of it, and insisted that he
remain in the castle to take care of the Queen and Rosabella. There was
little cheer in the castle that unhappy evening. And all night long, the
bird-boy thought he could hear the wings of a great bird beating
fiercely against the window-panes.

A month passed, an unhappy month in which there were no tidings from the
King. Then, one rainy morning, a messenger who had ridden so hard that
his poor horse could scarcely stagger, rode to the castle gate bearing
very evil news. A great battle had been fought, the army of Rosabella's
father had been completely defeated, and the troops of the wicked
Malefico were hurrying toward the castle as fast as they could come.

And so it was; for before the Queen had had time to summon the people
and gather together a few belongings, the troops of the enemy burst in
at the gate, and a dozen fierce soldiers surrounded the Queen,
Rosabella, and the bird-boy, and dragged them to Malefico.

When Malefico saw the bird-boy, a look of surprise appeared on his face,
for he had believed that the wonderful child was dead. Then he fell to
thinking, and as he thought, wicked purposes swept over his cruel face
just as the shadows of dark clouds sweep over a gloomy pool.

"If it were known that the winged child is alive," he thought, "the
people would thrust me from my place, and restore him to his father's
throne. Now that the bird-boy is in my hands, I will destroy him, and be
sure of my power.
So he smiled, and began to think of some manner in which he could bring
the bird-boy to a shameful end. At last he hit upon a plan. He would
declare that the bird-boy was not a human lad at all, but a witch-child;
he would then accuse the good King of having protected a witch-child,
and condemn them both to be stoned. So he threw the King and the Queen,
Rosabella and the bird-boy, into an old dungeon-tower, and went through
the mockery of having a trial. When it was over, he sent a soldier to
tell the King and the bird-boy that they were to be punished the
following day.

And now dawned the unhappy day. The bird-boy took Rosabella's hand in
his, and together they went to the barred window of the prison and
looked out upon the world. The morning was fresh and fair; a pleasant
southwest wind was blowing. The King and the bird-boy were to be led
forth at noon. The clock marked a quarter to twelve.

"Dear Rosabella," said the bird-boy sadly, "we have forgotten that
to-day is the day on which the great gray bird comes from the ocean and
circles the castle towers. If thou shouldst see the bird when I am gone,
greet it in my name, as we did when we were happy children.
"The bird may come," said Rosabella amid her sobs.

"No, Rosabella," said the bird-boy, "I shall never see the gray bird
again. And even if it were to come, what could it do to save us from
these cruel people?
When the clock stood at five minutes to twelve, there was a confused
noise below, and Malefico and the judges who shared with him the guilt
of the unrighteous punishment took their places on a kind of platform
which overlooked the place of execution.

"They will soon be coming to get us," said the King to the bird-boy.

And sure enough, they heard the jangle of the jailer's keys at the foot
of the stair.

Suddenly the sunlight in the room faded swiftly into a strange gray
gloom, and the bird-boy rushed to the window to see if a storm was at
hand. A great shadowy cloud, advancing with inconceivable rapidity,
already filled half the sky, and as the boy gazed into this cloud, he
saw to his astonishment that it was not a cloud at all, but hundreds and
hundreds of thousands of great gray birds, flapping their long wings.
The shadow of the birds fell over the platform on which the cruel
Malefico sat waiting for the King and the bird-boy to be brought forth,
and then ceased moving even as a ship that has come into harbor.

Far ahead of the vast swarm flew one lonely bird, and suddenly this bird
uttered a shrill and piercing cry. Immediately every bird let fall a
great beach-stone which he held in his claws, and for a long minute, the
sky rained stones, round, polished stones that fell like bolts of
thunder. When the storm was over, and the cloud had begun to break into
rifts and speckles of light and flapping gray wings, the wicked Malefico
and his cruel nobles lay buried forever beneath mound upon mound of
stones. The doom which Malefico had intended for another had overtaken
him.

The King and the Queen, Rosabella and the bird-boy, rushed down the
stairs and out into the sunlight. As they did so, the gray bird who had
led the cloud, sank through the air and alighted at their feet. But
scarcely had the bird's claws touched the ground, when there was a flash
of flame, and the bird-boy's mother stood before them. She took her son
in her arms, and told them all his history and her misfortunes, and how
she had watched over him year after year and gathered the birds to save
him.

Thus it came to pass that, when the troops of Malefico saw their former
Queen and heard her story, they acclaimed the bird-boy as their rightful
king, and carried him back in triumph into his own country. So the
bird-boy became a king, married Rosabella, and lived happily ever after.



 THE MASTER MARINER

Once upon a time a fine young fisherman rose early in the morning, and
sailed alone to the fishing-grounds. There was very little wind, and
beneath the speckled clouds and the cold, pearly light of the late dawn,
the broad, low billows went slowly and unrippled to the land.

The fisherman cast anchor, and threw overboard his lines. Suddenly his
boat moved uneasily, and close to its side the oily surface of the pale
sea broke into a tumbling mass of foam. In the heart of the troubled
waters, the fisherman beheld, to his great astonishment, a man clad in a
strange garment of gleaming black scales, struggling with an enormous
scarlet fish. A battle of life and death they fought, the man of the sea
trying to stab the fish with a short dagger of shining steel, the fish
trying, wolf-like, to tear at the body of its enemy. Now, with a swift
lash of its bright scarlet body, the fish would rush at the man; now,
with a long sure stroke of his powerful arms, the man would escape the
attack. Suddenly, the fish hurled itself clear out of the water, and
falling against the man, struck him a terrible blow with its tail. Then
the ocean man, who was stunned for a moment, would have perished, had
not the young fisherman swiftly seized his spear and plunged deep into
the body of the fish. Mortally wounded, the scarlet creature sank
through the sunless waters, the dark blood flowing from its side.

The man of the sea clutched the rail of the boat with his webbed hands,
and said to the fisherman, "I am the King of the Caves of the Sea. I owe
you my life, and you shall have a reward. Take this little silver fish.
It will bring you good fortune; and should you ever be in deadly peril,
you have but to cast it into the sea, and it will come and find me.
The fisherman thanked the King of the Caves, and took the silver fish.
It was about the length of your little finger, and had pale moon-stones
for eyes. The fisherman hung the talisman on a chain and wore it round
his neck.

From that morning on, everything prospered with the youth. His boat
never leaked, he was never caught in a storm, and the fish came to his
lines and nets the instant he threw them overboard. Within a year or two
he had grown so rich that he was able to buy the finest merchant ship in
the world, and became a master mariner. Surely no more splendid fellow
than this gallant, young captain was ever found on the Seven Seas. He
sailed to cold and foggy Flannel Land, where the inhabitants all have
incurable head colds, and have no other cloth but red flannel; he traded
in the ports of gorgeous Velvet Land, whose inhabitants dress in velvet,
and cover their walls with velvet hangings and their floors with velvet
rugs.

One pleasant morning, running before a fine westerly breeze, he came to
the Eastern Islands. Down the street of the bazaar walked the Master
Mariner, followed by those who had articles to sell. Some showed him
bright-colored birds which they had caught in the forests; others waved
squares of figured cloth and called upon him to buy them; others still
offered strange flasks and bottles of brass and gleaming copper. At the
end of the street, the Master Mariner discovered a little quiet counter
on which lay some dozens of puffy and distended brown-leather bags.

"What are these?" said the Master Mariner to a tall, lean man with
beady, brown eyes who was in charge of the shop.

"These are breezes, Master Captain," replied the shopman. "If you are
going south, here is a bag of a very reliable northwest wind" (he picked
up one of the brown bags); "if you are going east, here are some of the
best-assorted westerly gusts. I am selling them at a very low price
to-day, in fact at less than they cost me. What will you have?
"I'll have a smart easterly," replied the Master Mariner.

He put down fifty gold pieces on the counter, took the bag which the
shopman gave him, and walked away.

Now all these leather bags looked very much alike, and instead of
selling the Master Mariner a brisk easterly breeze, the shopman had made
an error, and sold him a frightful storm.

Again the Master Mariner went to sea; but luckily for him, he put the
imprisoned storm away in a locker, intending to use it on some other
voyage. Presently he came to Silk Land, loveliest of all the Cloth
Islands. There the inhabitants dress only in the finest of silks; the
roofs and walls are covered with layers of silk; the sun always shines,
and pretty birds with silken plumage chatter in the fern-like trees.
Splash! And the Master Mariner fell into the sea.

Now the island of Silk Land was at this time ruled by the prettiest of
princesses. She was about eighteen years old; she was tall for her age,
and her eyes were quite the loveliest shade of brown. When the Master
Mariner's fine ship came into the harbor of Silk Land, cleaving the
turquoise water, and with the bright sun shining on her silvery-white
sails, the Princess happened to be resting under a silken awning on the
roof of her palace. Catching sight of the ship, the Princess cried to
her companions:--

"See what a fine ship is coming into port! She must be laden with many
wonderful things. Send word to the Captain that I intend to visit her
to-morrow morning.
The next morning, sure enough, the Princess paid a visit to the ship,
which lay at a wharf below the palace. In honor of the Princess's
coming, everything had been swept, scrubbed, and brightened, and
gorgeous carpets from the Eastern Islands covered the decks. In shaded
nooks, under costly tapestries, lay the treasures of the
cargo--wonderful cloths and spices from the Eastern Islands, vessels of
gold and silver from the Adamant Mountains, and jewels from the Desert
of the Moon.

Now scarcely had the Master Mariner set eyes on the Princess, than he
began to think her quite the most wonderful person he ever had beheld;
as for the Princess, scarcely had the Master Mariner directed two or
three respectful and somewhat tender glances in her direction, than she
began to believe him quite the most gallant youth she had ever seen. She
gave orders that several of the marvels be brought to her palace, and
was looking about for something else, when her eyes chanced to fall upon
the silver fish the Master Mariner was wearing.

"Pray, what is that little silver fish?" asked the Princess.

"A mere trifle which a friend once gave me," replied the Master Mariner,
reading in the Princess's eyes and demeanor that she desired the
talisman. "If Your Majesty will only deign to accept it, it is yours.
And blinded by the Princess's eyes, he gallantly, but somewhat
incautiously, took the silver fish from its chain and gave it to the
Princess, who laughed prettily, and accepted the gift.

Silver trumpets sounded, the servitors gathered up the treasures which
the Princess had chosen, and the royal party returned to the palace with
a good deal of chattering and laughter.

In a few days, the Master Mariner disposed of his cargo, and went again
to sea. But wherever he went, the image of the beautiful Princess of
Silk Land went with him.

Under the silken awning, on the wind-swept balcony, sat the Princess,
and the image of the young Captain was often in her mind.

After three months had passed, the Princess took it into her head that
it was time for the Master Mariner to return to Silk Land, and gave
orders that a sharp watch be kept from the tower of the palace for his
returning vessel. One morning, just as the Princess was having breakfast
in her wonderful silken bed, news was brought to her that a large ship
was headed for the harbor.

"Is it the Master Mariner's ship?" asked the Princess.

"I do not know, Your Majesty," replied the messenger. "The vessel is
still many miles out to sea.
So the Princess jumped out of bed, and without waiting for the ladies of
the bedchamber to dress her, ran upstairs to her balcony. A great ship
was coming in under a favoring breeze. Nearer and nearer it came, till
the Princess could even distinguish the men aboard. Suddenly she uttered
a little scream, and ran down stairs pell-mell. At the same moment the
bells of Silk Land all began to ring wildly, and the beating of drums
sounded through the town.

The approaching ship was a pirate ship! From the topmast flew the
terrible black flag of the pirates of the Northern Isles!

Great confusion followed.

Warned by the uproar of the bells and drums, the people came scurrying
through the streets to the palace; some carrying children in their arms;
others the best beloved of their household furnishings. The palace was
hastily made ready for a siege.

Soon, cursing and swearing, the black-bearded pirates arrived, and began
to sack the town. Into every house they went, pulling out all the bureau
drawers, reading private letters, upsetting the clocks, and leaving the
water running in the kitchen sinks. They filled their pockets with
cuff-links and watches.

Now, if the pirates had taken only the cufflinks, stick-pins, cameo
brooches, silver candlesticks, souvenir spoons, and sugar-tongs, and
then gone away, the raid would not have been too terrible; but the
rogues, bribed by the horrid old King of the Oyster Mountains, a
rejected suitor, were bent on getting possession of the Princess. On
discovering that she had locked herself up in the strong palace, their
rage knew no bounds. They made a dozen different attempts to break open
the palace door, but all in vain. Finally, they decided to besiege the
fortress.

For four days all went well enough with the Princess and her imprisoned
people; but by the sixth day most of the food had been eaten; and by the
end of the eighth day, the Princess knew she would have to surrender the
following morning. With a sinking heart she went to a turret and looked
out over the ocean in the hope of catching sight of a passing sail. But
she saw only the deserted town and the pirate ship riding at anchor in
the bay. An hour later she went to the turret again, and again she saw
no sign of anything at sea. A terrible despair seized upon her, but
nevertheless once more to the turret she climbed.

Far out at sea, headed toward land, was the brave ship of the Master
Mariner!

So great was the joy of the poor Princess at the sight of the gallant
vessel that she almost swooned; but recovering herself, like the
Princess that she was, she ran down into the courtyard and told the news
to her people. Immediately those who were weak or fretful from hunger
began to take heart, and all who could crowded to the barred windows.

The Master Mariner's vessel came riding into the port; the watchers saw
her drop anchor, saw the boats being lowered, and the sailors coming
ashore. Soon the pirates and the sailors were at it hammer and tongs; a
ceaseless clack clack of steel beating upon steel rose to the turrets of
the palace; there were dreadful duels in the alleyways and battles in
the public squares. Alas! just as the sailors were carrying the day, the
Master Mariner received a blow on the head which knocked him insensible,
and the mariners, disorganized by the loss of their chief, were soon
surrounded and taken prisoners. Then, taking heart, the pirates rushed
the palace, and burst open the doors.

When the rogues had taken everything on which they could lay their
hands, they brought the prisoners and the plunder to the marketplace.

"Shall we bind all these people and take them aboard?" asked a pirate.

"No!" roared the one-eyed pirate chief. "Take only the Princess and that
rogue of a Master Mariner.
The people now began to cry, "Oh, don't take the Princess, our dear
Princess!" But all their prayers were useless.

Now, because the Master Mariner's ship was far more swift and beautiful
than the pirate ship, the pirates, after setting fire to their own
vessel, abandoned her, and put their plunder on board the Master
Mariner's vessel. The following morning, leaving the people of Silk Land
robbed and mourning, the pirates sailed away.

Within a few hours, all signs of land had disappeared. The sea was as
black as ink. Against the horizon's edge, the great waves were leaping
and breaking into foam.

"Bring me the list of booty!" cried the pirate captain, roaring the last
word.

So the pirate treasurer came on deck, and read a long list beginning,--

"Fifty-three scarf-pins.
"Hooray!" shouted the pirate crew.

"A hundred and eighty-five sterling silver berry-spoons," next announced
the treasurer.

"Hooray!" cried the crew again.

"One thousand clocks!" cried the treasurer.

"How many with alarms?" asked an old pirate anxiously.

There was a strained silence. The treasurer consulted his list.

"Seven hundred and forty-nine," he answered.

"Hooray!" yelled the pirate crew.

When the list had been read (it took very nearly half an hour to do it)
the one-eyed captain cried, "Bring forth the Master Mariner!
So the Master Mariner was brought forth, and thrown brutally against a
mast. The pirate chief put his arms akimbo, cleared his throat savagely,
and roared, "So you thought you were going to punish me, did you! Well,
I'll show you what happens to people who upset my plans. Here, Hawk Eye,
and you, Toby, throw this fellow overboard.
Hearing this awful order, the Princess screamed and would have run to
the Master Mariner, had not rude hands restrained her.

Splash! the Mariner fell into the inky sea. Swift as a bird, his own
ship went by him; he saw the mocking face of the pirate chief leering at
him from over the rail; in a few minutes he was alone, all, all alone in
the wide, wide sea. For some time he swam about, and by great good luck
discovered a log of wood strong enough to bear his weight, floating near
at hand. Upon this he climbed, and there we shall leave him for the
present.

When the Captain had disappeared from sight miles behind, the pirate
chief walked over to the Princess, and looking at her, said sneeringly,
"Well, my beauty, are you going to make up your mind to be the wife of
the King of the Oyster Mountains? I'm taking you to him, and mind now,
no fooling!
The Princess shrank from him with horror, and as she fell back, the sun
gleamed on the silver fish she was wearing at her throat. The chief made
a rude snatch at it; the Princess, however, was quicker than he, and hit
him a good box on the ear.

"Ow!" cried the chief, dancing up and down with rage. "I'll fix you, you
ill-tempered minx. Here, somebody, tie this girl to the mast for the
rest of the day, and give her nothing but bread and water.
In obedience to his order, the Princess, with her arms tied by the
wrists behind her back, was lashed to the mast. When she had been
securely bound, the chief, whose ear was still tingling, took the silver
fish. He was looking at it when he saw something which made him drop the
fish on the deck.

Out of the forecastle door thick clouds of black mist were rolling,
exactly as if the hold of the ship were on fire. For a meddlesome pirate
had found the leather bag of storm-wind and had opened it, mistaking it
for a bag of wine.

The strange clouds, swirling round the deck, grew instant by instant
darker and denser. Soon the tops of the masts could no longer be
distinguished. The sun took on a horrible copper hue, and the sea became
a mottled black and green. A howling wind arose.

A moment later, with the violence of an explosion, the storm burst.
Mountain-high rose the glassy white-capped waves. The lightning fell in
violet cataracts, and thunder roared and tumbled through the caverns of
the sky. An ocean of hissing rain fell into the waters.

Suddenly the pirate chief, as he staggered down the stairs, shouted, "We
are lost!
Just astern, an enormous, glassy wave, higher than the masts of the
ship, was about to break. The pirates yelled, but little good their
yelling did them. An instant later the wave broke upon the deck, and
crashing tons of green water swept every single pirate into the sea.
Slowly, and with the tense struggle of a wounded animal, the good ship
lifted itself from the waves.

The Princess was the only human being left on board. Only the cords
which bound her to the mast had saved her from being swept away.

Now, when the water swept the deck, the silver fish which lay at the
Princess's feet became alive and darted over the rail into the sea.

The storm continued. The helpless Princess expected every minute to sink
with the ship into the roaring waters. Suddenly, to her horror, a high
rocky island appeared a few miles ahead. Toward this island, over whose
cruel reefs the ocean was foaming and breaking, the ship was drifting
fast. Tied to the mast, the Princess listened to the terrible cry of the
breakers, and, spell-bound, watched the jagged rocks of the island ever
drawing nearer.

Now while the Princess was in this terrible situation, the Master
Mariner, who had been blown before the storm like a feather, also came
in sight of the rocky island. The instant he caught sight of the shore,
and heard the roaring of the breakers, he knew that he could not hope to
reach the land. He was on the edge of the reefs when the King of the
Caves of the Sea, who had been summoned by the silver fish, rose out of
the water beside him, and taking him in his webbed hands, swam with him
to a place of safety. Just as they reached the shallows, the mists of
the tempest parted, and driving through the darkness and the storm,
headed for the reefs, came the Master Mariner's ship with the Princess
tied to the mast.

"Oh, save her! Save the Princess!" cried the Master Mariner.

The King of the Caves of the Sea stretched out his hands over the island
and uttered a strange and mysterious word. So awful was its power that
the rocky cliffs split open, forming a safe and sheltered harbor. Into
this port came the ship, safe at last as a bird in its nest.

So the Master Mariner, the Princess, and the ship were all wonderfully
preserved, and when the storm was over, the King of the Caves saw them
home to Silk Land. There the Master Mariner found his crew waiting for
him, and in a few days they had rigged new sails for the ship which were
even whiter than the old. The inhabitants got back the fifty-three scarf
pins, the hundred and eighty-five sterling silver berry-spoons, the
thousand clocks, and the rest of the booty which the pirates had stowed
away in the Master Mariner's ship.

Great was the rejoicing.

Greater still was the joy, however, when the Master Mariner married the
Princess.



 THE MARVELOUS DOG AND THE WONDERFUL CAT

Once upon a time there was an old enchanter who taught magic and
enchantment to the younger fairies. Year after year, and morning after
morning, he was to be found at his school-room in the Fairies' College,
standing between his desk and a blackboard, now writing down the spell
for turning noses into turnips, now changing sunflower seeds into pearls
before the very eyes of his pupils.

The old enchanter liked this life of quiet and study, and doubtless
would have been teaching in Fairyland to this very day, had he not been
so unfortunate as to quarrel with the terrible sorcerer Zidoc, who was
then Lord High Chancellor of the Fairies' College. I have forgotten
exactly what the quarrel was about, but I think that it had to do with
the best spell for causing castles to fall to pieces in an instant. At
any rate, Zidoc, who considered himself quite the most wonderful
enchanter in Fairyland, was furious at being opposed, and told the old
enchanter, very angrily, that he was not to have his classes any more
and must leave the college at once. So the poor old gentleman packed up
his magic books, put his enchanter's wand into its silver case, and went
to the country one pleasant day in search of a house.

Thanks to the advice of a friendly chimney swift, it did not take him
long to find one. The dwelling was the property of the Fairy Jocapa. It
stood just off the high road, close by a lane of great oaks whose shiny,
fringed leaves glistened in the hot noon-day sun; it had a high roof
with sides steep as mountain slopes, and one great chimney; and its
second story thrust itself out over the first in the old-fashioned way.
Green fields, little hills, and pleasant meadows in which red and white
cows were grazing lay behind the dwelling.

Seeing the front door wide open, the enchanter walked in. It was very
quiet. Only the far away klingle-klangle of a cow-bell could be heard.

"Here shall I live," said the enchanter. And he brought his possessions
to the house.

Now, one autumnal morning, when a blue haze hung over the lonely fields
from which the reapers had departed, and the golden leaves were wet
underfoot, the old enchanter went for a walk down the lane, and finding
the day agreeable, kept on until he found himself in the woods. Arriving
at the crest of a little hill in the woodland, he saw below him, almost
at the foot of the slope, a countryman with a white puppy and a black
kitten following at his heels. The little dog barked merrily out of pure
high spirits, whilst the kitten leaped and struck with its tiny paws at
the passing white butterflies.

As the old enchanter approached the countryman, he happened to hear him
say to the animals,--

"Alas, my poor innocents, what a pity that I should have to abandon
you!
"What's that?" said the enchanter, halting the countryman. "You intend
to abandon these helpless creatures?
"Alas, I must," replied the countryman, pulling a large blue bandanna
handkerchief from his pocket and applying it to the corners of his eyes.
"We are too poor to be able to feed them, and my children love them so
well that I cannot find it in my heart to do them harm. I am taking them
into these woods to abandon them, in the hope that, like the wild
animals, they will soon learn to shift for themselves.
"Give them to me," said the old enchanter, "I will bring them up." The
countryman nodded his head. "As for you, here is a golden florin. May it
bring you better fortune.
Thus did the white puppy and black kitten change hands.

Once he had led the animals safely home, the enchanter resolved to make
them the most wonderful animals that had ever been seen in the whole
wide world, whether in Fairyland or out of it. Being an enchanter, he
could, of course, do this more easily than other people. So he taught
the cat and the dog all the known languages, then history, arithmetic,
dancing, social deportment, and a variety of the best magic and spells.
The cat, as was to be expected, was particularly good on anything that
had 'cat' in it; he once catalogued all the principal catastrophes;
while the dog, although a good student, had a fancy for writing
doggerel. Many and many a time, when the enchanter and his wonderful
animals were seated in their armchairs round a blazing fire, talking
exactly as any three good friends might talk, a nose would flatten
itself against the panes, and the three companions would see looking in
at them some stranger whose curiosity had got the better of his manners.

The dog, I may say, had grown up to be a fine fellow of the
short-haired, white bull terrier family; the cat had grown to be as
aristocratic as a panther. When their education was complete, the
animals came to their teacher and begged him to let them go away and see
the world. For a long time the enchanter, who loved his charges very
much indeed, resisted their request; but as they continued to press him,
he came at length to yield. Calling them before him, he said to them:--

"Well, dear pupils, if you must go, you must go. I owe the Fairy Jocapa
twelve months rent for this house. She is now living with her nephew,
the King of the Land of the Runaway Rivers. You shall take twelve golden
florins to her. Your route will take you over all the kingdoms of the
whole wide world.
So the white dog, who was the stronger of the two, took the purse with
the twelve golden coins, and put it in a large wallet which he wore at
his side, and then both the wonderful animals said good-bye. At the
corner of the lane they turned again to look for the last time at their
dwelling, and saw their old master still waving at them from the little
window over the door. Then they fared over the hills and far away.

So wise, so well-bred and good-tempered were these wonderful animals,
that their journey across the world was a great success from the
beginning. Their fame spread from kingdom to kingdom like wild-fire. The
universities, colleges, and other learned societies fought with each
other for the privilege of entertaining these distinguished students. To
this very day, the address which the cat made on catapults and
cataplasms, before the professors of the University of Sagessa, is
remembered as one of the great events of the time; while the dog's
address on dogma before the assembled scholars of the Royal Academy of
Fairyland was printed in a special book bound in gold leaf and walpus
leather. Both the cat and the dog were awarded countless honorary
decorations.

And so, little by little, they came to a hilly land in which all the
streams raced pell-mell to the sea, and there they knew themselves to
be in the Kingdom of the Runaway Rivers. A three days' journey brought
them to the royal castle. Arriving in the twilight, they were somewhat
surprised to find a number of torchbearers waiting for them in the
castle courtyard. With great respect, these attendants conducted the cat
and the dog into a little ante-room, and then retired, leaving them
alone. A few minutes later, a very old woman, who, the animals noticed,
was stone-blind, came to take them before the king.

"How strange!" whispered the cat in its rather meouw-y voice.

"Very," whispered back the dog in his deeper tone.

Having opened, one after the other, three great doors with three
different iron keys, the old woman, guiding herself by touching the wall
with her hand, led the animals into a long dark corridor. The cat, who
could see quite well in the dark, did not mind this, but the dog was not
particularly pleased. The echoes of the old woman's boots went rolling
along in the hollow darkness; the dog could hear his heart beat, and saw
his black companion's eyes glowing like pools of flame. Then, to their
mutual relief, the animals saw a point of light appearing far down the
passage, and on reaching this, they discovered a second blind old woman
holding a torch. The first old woman beckoned them to follow this new
guide, and disappeared again into the dark corridors by which they had
arrived.

The second old woman, lifting high the torch, first led her charges
through three more great doors, all of which she carefully locked behind
her. Soon the animals found themselves at the top of a winding stair
whose end was lost in darkness. Down this stair they went, turning, ever
turning, down and round, down and round, till both cat and dog felt
dizzily that they must have reached the heart of the earth. Then, little
by little, a pin-point of light began to glow brighter and brighter,
and the animals found themselves at the foot of the stairs and opposite
a little door. And there, by this door, stood another blind old woman,
who held a torch and beckoned to the animals to follow.

Three more doors they passed, the last one opening on a very narrow,
winding passage. In and out they turned, walking one behind the other,
for a time that seemed very, very long. Suddenly a narrow door appeared
in the winding wall, which opened inward as they drew near, revealing a
beautiful round chamber richly furnished and hung with the finest
tapestries. Beside the fireplace, in which a wood-fire was cheerily
burning, sat a gray-haired lady, who was no other than the Fairy Jocapa,
and in the centre of the room, reading a great book by the light of many
candles, sat a young man, the King.

In spite of the enchanter's careful training in manners, the cat and the
dog, I am sorry to say, almost stared for an instant at the King. Small
wonder that they did so, for the unfortunate young man lay under a
horrid spell, and his face and hands were not pink or white or
sun-brown, like yours or mine, but bright green, like a parrot's wing!

"Welcome, O wonderful animals," said the enchanted King. "Your fame has
gone before you into every land, and it is said that there is no
question you cannot answer. Listen, then, to my story and help me if you
can.

"You see me before you, hideously changed. Until you entered here, an
instant past, no eyes but those of my aunt had beheld my horrible
countenance. It was she who caused this enchanted chamber to appear in
the heart of the foundations of my castle; and in this chamber I have
hidden since that terrible hour when the spell was put upon me. My
subjects only know that I am still alive. The Lord Chancellor rules the
kingdom in my stead. But hearken to my story.

"Ten months ago, as I was driving my chariot down a narrow road built
along a river-bank close to the stream, I encountered a chariot being
driven furiously in the opposite direction. The driver of the chariot
was a tall, elderly man, wearing a wizard's cap; his face was red as
with anger, an evil light gleamed in his small malicious eyes. In order
to let him pass, I turned to one side, as near to the river-brink as I
dared; but the space was too narrow, our chariots locked wheels, and his
was overthrown. Turning upon me a face aflame with hatred, he cried out,
'I will teach you what it is to offend the Enchanter Zidoc'; and an
instant later the wizard himself, the struggling horses, and the
overturned chariot disappeared in a rumble of thunder and a great flash
of flame. I turned homeward, never noticing that anything had happened
to me. As I chanced to pass a roadside cottage, a little child playing
about saw me and ran, screaming for fear, to the door. A little farther
on, I stopped to drink of a spring. Judge of my horror when I leaned
over the clear pool of water and saw that my face had turned a bright
green! I waited till nightfall, stole into the castle unobserved, and
sought the aid of my aunt, the fairy. You know the rest. Speak, O
wonderful dog and wonderful cat, and bid me hope a little!
And the poor King hid his bright green face in his hands.

"The Enchanter Zidoc is an old enemy of our dear master," said the white
dog, "and his power as a sorcerer is the greatest in Fairyland!'

"I have tried all my powers against him in vain," said the Fairy Jocapa,
sadly.

"But let us not despair," broke in the cat. "Zidoc is now to be found in
these dominions. His castle lies on the border of the Silver Hills. The
dog and I will go there, and see if we can help the King.
So the Fairy and the unhappy King thanked the wise animals, and sent for
the blind old women to lead them back to the upper world. Early next
morning, the famous pair began the journey to the Enchanter's den. The
dog's plan was to pretend to be but an everyday stray dog, and to this
end, he rolled several times in a mud-puddle; the cat, too, was to
appear as a stray cat, and neglected his fine black coat in order to
look the part.

Unfortunately for their plan, Zidoc had in his chamber a little
enchanted bell which rang shrilly when danger threatened him. Hearing
the bell ring late at night, Zidoc rose from his bed, and hurrying to
the turret window, saw, by the light of the waning moon, the dog and the
cat making their way to the castle through the wood. Rubbing his hands
with glee, he determined to let the two animals walk headlong into his
power, and then inflict upon them some terrible revenge.

The first day the dog went indoors, and concealed himself under a sofa,
while the cat remained outside. When twilight came, the dog ran out and
met the cat in the castle garden.

"Did you discover anything?" asked the cat.

"Nothing whatever," replied the dog.

"I will try to-morrow," said the cat.

And so, when the morning came, the dog remained outside while the cat
concealed himself behind a curtain. When the twilight came, the animals
met again.

"Did you discover anything?" asked the dog.

"Very little," replied the cat. "The Sorcerer Serponel is coming
to-morrow to pay Zidoc a visit. One of us must hide in the room in which
they will talk; for perhaps we may learn something which may help us to
lift the spell from the King.
"To-morrow it is my turn," said the dog. And so the next morning he
stole into the house and hid again beneath the sofa.

Now Zidoc knew very well where the dog had concealed himself. Moreover,
he had summoned the powerful Serponel to his aid in order that the dog
and the cat should have no opportunity to escape.

When Serponel arrived, both the wicked enchanters went to the room in
which the dog lay concealed. First, Zidoc locked the only door with a
great key and then he said to Serponel,--

"Brother, someone tells me that there is an enemy hidden under the
sofa.
"Yes, brother," replied the dreadful Serponel.

"And something tells me that it is time to let him feel your staff.
Now Zidoc had an enchanted staff whose blows were mortal, and knowing
this, the poor dog, who was trapped between the wall and the two
sorcerers, grew cold with fear to the tip of his white tail. Just as he
was about to make a bolt into the open, Zidoc dragged the sofa swiftly
aside, and aimed a terrible blow at him, which by the greatest good luck
just missed its mark. He then ran out into the room, pursued by the
sorcerers, who little by little forced him toward a corner.

And now, just as Zidoc, holding the staff uplifted, was about to strike
the poor dog with all his force, a black shape, with flaming eyes and
paws outstretched to scratch, leaped through the open window and landed
upon Zidoc's back. It was the brave cat, who had heard the fracas from
his hiding-place below and had clawed his way up the castle wall to help
his friend. Valiant Puss, forgetting in one instant, I must admit, all
its knowledge of languages, catastrophes, history, social deportment,
and agriculture, plunged instantly into the fray, and gave Zidoc a
frightful scratch, which so upset him that it caused him to drop his
staff, while the dog profiting by the confusion, and forgetting all
about geometry, mathematics, agriculture, and dogma, managed to give
Serponel a good bite just above the ankle.

The wily Zidoc, however, was not to be so easily thwarted. Uttering a
magic word, he caused the room to be filled with darkness, and in the
cover of this darkness he transformed himself instantly into a black cat
exactly like the learned cat, while Serponel changed himself into a
white dog exactly like the learned dog. At the same moment he caused the
locked door to fly open.

"Now," thought he, "I will cause the cat to follow the wrong white dog,
and the dog to follow the wrong cat; we shall thus separate the animals,
and when we have lured them far away from each other, Serponel and I
will resume our true forms, and destroy these meddlesome creatures.
When the darkness cleared, the hearts of the true animals fell for fear
lest the sorcerer's ruse be successful; but they met the challenge
readily, and instead of fleeing, stood their ground; the true dog
battling with the false dog, the real cat with the false cat. Never was
such a hullaballoo heard in Fairyland. Then, seeing that he was in
danger of being badly scratched, Zidoe brought on another darkness, the
floor of the castle shook, a noise as of thunder roared and rattled
through the room. When the darkness ended, both the enchanters had been
separated and the cats were confused, the real dog was chasing the real
cat, thinking that he was following Zidoc, while Serponel, who had been
the false white dog, was pursuing Zidoc, who had been the false black
cat! Down the stairs, over the terraces and the gardens ran the true
dog, pursuing the true cat, while indoors, up and down through the rooms
and over the furniture, raced the false animals.

The poor cat, thinking he was being pursued by the wrong dog, grew short
of breath, and, hearing the snapping at his heels, ran up a convenient
tree. Hardly had he reached a point above the dog's jaws when a voice
said:--

"Why, my pupils, my pupils! What a way to behave! Stop your quarreling
this instant!
The animals turned to look, and saw their master, the old enchanter. He
had been worried by their long absence and had gone forth to look for
them. Thus, at the same moment that the poor dog saw that he had been
pursuing his friend, the cat saw that he had been escaping from his
comrade.

Suddenly a noise from the castle arrested their attention, and on
looking up, all saw through the windows the false dog pursuing the false
cat down the hall of state.

Now, if you remember the first part of this story, you will recall that
Zidoc quarreled with the old enchanter over the right spell for
destroying castles. A triumphant smile shone on the lips of the old
teacher; he stretched forth his hand toward the castle and uttered a
magic word.

There was a roar as of twenty thousand cataracts, and in the twinkling
of an eye, the castle collapsed in a cloud of dust, burying the two
wicked magicians in its ruins.

"There, I told him so!" said the old enchanter.

When the dog and the cat had recovered from the events of the day, the
three friends began their journey back to the palace of the enchanted
King. He came to the castle gate to meet them, for Zidoc's overthrow had
broken the spell which had so oddly disfigured him. Through the open
doors, a splendid banquet could be seen waiting, and the sound of music
was heard.

So the old enchanter gave his arm to the Fairy Jocapa, the Prince gave
his to the white dog, and the cat followed all by himself. Then came the
host of rejoicing courtiers.

When the festival was over, the enchanter and the wonderful animals went
back, loaded with royal gifts, to their own little house and lived
happily there to a good old age.