
 " Why can ' t dollies have a Thanksgiving dinner as well as real folks ? " 
asked Polly Pine . 

 " I don ' t know why , " said mamma , laughing;  " go and dress them in their
best clothes , get the dolls ' house swept and dusted and the table
ready . Then I ' ll fix their dinner before we go downstairs . " 

 " Oh , how nice ! " said Polly Pine . 

The doll house stood in the nursery . It was very big and very
beautiful . It was painted red; it had tall chimneys , and a fine front
door with R . Bliss on a brass plate . There were lace curtains at the
windows , and two steps led up to the cunning little piazza . Polly Pine
swept the rooms with her tiny broom and dusted them . Then she set the
table in the dining-room with the very best dishes and the finest
silver . She set a teeny vase in the middle of the table , with two
violets in it , and she put dolly table napkins at each place . 

When the house was all nice and clean she dressed Lavinia in her pink
muslin , and Dora Jane in her gray velvet , and Hannah Welch in her
yellow silk; then she seated them around the table , each one in her
own chair . Polly was just telling them about company manners , how they
must not eat with their knives , or leave their teaspoons in their cups
when they drank their tea , when the door opened and in came mamma with
a real dolls ' Thanksgiving dinner . 

There was a chicken bone to put on the platter before Hannah Welch , 
for Hannah always did the carving . There were cunning little dishes of
mashed potato and cranberry sauce , and some celery in a tiny tumbler , 
and the smallest squash pie baked in a patty pan . Polly Pine just
hopped up and down with delight when she saw it . She set everything on
the table; then she ran away to put on her nicest muslin frock with
the pink ribbons , and she went downstairs to her own dinner . 

There were gentlemen there for dinner--gentlemen Polly was very fond
of--and she had a nice time visiting with one of them . He could change
his table napkin into a white rabbit , and she forgot all about the
dolls ' Thanksgiving dinner until it was dessert-time , and the nuts and
raisins came in . 

Then Polly remembered , and she jumped down from her chair and asked
mamma if she might go upstairs and see if the dolls had eaten their
dinner . When mamma told about the doll house Thanksgiving , all the
family wanted to go , too , to find out if the dolls had enjoyed their
dinner . 

The front door of the doll house was open , and there sat the dolls
just as their little mistress had left them--only they had eaten
nearly all the dinner ! Everything was gone except the potato and the
cranberry sauce . The chicken leg was picked bare , the bread was
nibbled , and the little pie was eaten all around . 

 " Well , this is funny , " said papa . 

Just then they heard a funny , scratching noise in the doll house , and
a little gray mouse jumped out from under the table . He ran out the
front door of the doll house , and over the piazza , and down the steps
before you could say  " Jack Robinson . " In a minute he was gone--nobody
knew where . There was another tiny mouse in the doll house under the
parlour sofa , and a third one under Lavinia ' s bed , with a poor , 
frightened gray tail sticking out . They all got away safe . Papa would
not allow mamma to go for the cat . He said:

 " Why can ' t a poor little mouse have a Thanksgiving dinner as well as
we ? " 




AN OLD-FASHIONED THANKSGIVING[30]

BY ROSE TERRY COOKE . 

 A long story about a family of hardy New England pioneers in
 Revolutionary days . It will be most enjoyed by the older
 children . 


 " Pile in , Hannah . Get right down  ' long o ' the clock , so ' s to kinder
shore it up . I ' ll fix in them pillers t ' other side on ' t , and you can
set back ag ' inst the bed . Good-bye , folks ! Gee up ! Bright . Gee ! I tell
ye , Buck . " 

[ 30: Adapted from  " Huckleberries , " Houghton , Mifflin Co . ]

 " Good-bye ! " nodded Hannah , from the depths of the old calash which
granny had given her for a riding-hood , and her rosy face sparkled
under the green shadow like a blossom under a burdock leaf . 

This was their wedding journey . Thirty long miles to be travelled , at
the slow pace of an oxcart , where to-day a railroad spins by , and a
log hut in the dim distance . 

But Hannah did not cry about it . There was a momentary choking , 
perhaps , in her throat , as she caught a last view of granny ' s mob cap
and her father ' s rough face , with the red head of her small
stepbrother between them , grouped in the doorway . Her mother had died
long ago , and there was another in her place now , and a swarm of
children . Hannah was going to her own home , to a much easier life , 
and going with John . Why should she cry ? 

Besides , Hannah was the merriest little woman in the country . She had
a laugh always lying ready in a convenient dimple . 

She never knew what  " blues " meant , except to dye stocking yarn . She
was sunny as a dandelion and gay as a bobolink . Her sweet good nature
never failed through the long day ' s journey , and when night came she
made a pot of tea at the campfire , roasted a row of apples , and
broiled a partridge John shot by the wayside , with as much enjoyment
as if this was the merriest picnic excursion , and not a solitary camp
in the forest , long miles away from any human dwelling , and by no
means sure of safety from some lingering savage , some beast of harmful
nature , or at least a visit from a shambling black bear , for bears
were plentiful enough in that region . 

But none of these things worried Hannah . She ate her supper with
hearty appetite , said her prayers with John , and curled down on the
featherbed in the cart , while John heaped on more wood , and , 
shouldering his musket , went to lengthen the ropes that tethered his
oxen , and then mounted guard over the camp . Hannah watched his fine , 
grave face , as the flickering light illuminated it , for a few minutes , 
and then slept tranquilly till dawn . And by sunset next day the little
party drew up at the door of the log hut they called home . 

It looked very pretty to Hannah . She had the fairy gift , that is so
rare among mortals , of seeing beauty in its faintest expression; and
the young grass about the rough stone doorstep , the crimson cones on
the great larch tree behind it , the sunlit panes of the west window , 
the laugh and sparkle of the brook that ran through the clearing , the
blue eyes of the squirrel caps that blossomed shyly and daintily
beside the stumps of new-felled trees--all these she saw and delighted
in . And when the door was open , the old clock set up , the bed laid on
the standing bedplace , and the three chairs and table ranged against
the wall , she began her house-wifery directly , singing as she went . 
Before John had put his oxen in the small barn , sheltered the cart and
the tools in it , and shaken down hay into the manger , Hannah had made
a fire , hung on the kettle , spread up her bed with homespun sheets and
blankets and a wonderful cover of white-and-red chintz , set the table
with a loaf of bread , a square of yellow butter , a bowl of maple
sugar , and a plate of cheese; and even released the cock and the hen
from their uneasy prison in a splint basket , and was feeding them in
the little woodshed when John came in . 

His face lit up , as he entered , with that joyful sense of home so
instinctive in every true man and woman . He rubbed his hard hands
together , and catching Hannah as she came in at the shed door , 
bestowed upon her a resounding kiss . 

 " You ' re the most of a little woman I ever see , Hannah , I swan to
man . " 

Hannah laughed like a swarm of spring blackbirds . 

 " I declare , John , you do beat all ! Ain ' t it real pleasant here ? Seems
to me I never saw things so handy . " 

Oh , Hannah , what if your prophetic soul could have foreseen the
conveniences of this hundred years after ! Yet the shelves , the pegs , 
the cupboard in the corner , the broad shelf above the fire , the great
pine chest under the window , and the clumsy settle , all wrought out of
pine board by John ' s patient and skilful fingers , filled all her
needs; and what can modern conveniences do more ? 

So they ate their supper at home for the first time , happy as
new-nested birds , and far more grateful . 

John had built a sawmill on the brook a little way from the house , and
already owned a flourishing trade , for the settlement about the lake
from which Nepasset Brook sprung was quite large , and till John
Perkins went there the lumber had been all drawn fifteen miles off , to
Litchfield , and his mill was only three miles from Nepash village . 
Hard work and hard fare lay before them both , but they were not
daunted by the prospect . . . . 

By and by a cradle entered the door , and a baby was laid in it . . . . 

One baby is well enough in a log cabin , with one room for all the
purposes of life; but when next year brought two more , a pair of stout
boys , then John began to saw lumber for his own use . A bedroom was
built on the east side of the house , and a rough stairway into the
loft--more room perhaps than was needed; but John was called in Nepash
 " a dre ' dful forecastin ' man , " and he took warning from the twins . And
timely warning it proved , for as the years slipped by , one after
another , they left their arrows in his quiver till ten children
bloomed about the hearth . The old cabin had disappeared entirely . A
good-sized frame house of one story , with a high-pitched roof , stood
in its stead , and a slab fence kept roving animals out of the yard and
saved the apple trees from the teeth of stray cows and horses . 

Poor enough they were still . The loom in the garret always had its web
ready , the great wheel by the other window sung its busy song year in
and year out . Dolly was her mother ' s right hand now; and the twins , 
Ralph and Reuben , could fire the musket and chop wood . Sylvy , the
fourth child , was the odd one . All the rest were sturdy , rosy , 
laughing girls and boys; but Sylvy had been a pining baby , and grew up
into a slender , elegant creature , with clear gray eyes , limpid as
water , but bright as stars , and fringed with long golden lashes the
colour of her beautiful hair--locks that were coiled in fold on fold
at the back of her fine head , like wreaths of undyed silk , so pale was
their yellow lustre . She bloomed among the crowd of red-cheeked , 
dark-haired lads and lasses , stately and incongruous as a June lily in
a bed of tulips . But Sylvy did not stay at home . The parson ' s lady at
Litchfield came to Nepash one Sunday , with her husband , and seeing
Sylvy in the square corner pew with the rest , was mightily struck by
her lovely face , and offered to take her home with her the next week , 
for the better advantages of schooling . Hannah could not have spared
Dolly; but Sylvia was a dreamy , unpractical child , and though all the
dearer for being the solitary lamb of the flock by virtue of her
essential difference from the rest , still , for that very reason , it
became easier to let her go . Parson Everett was childless , and in two
years ' time both he and his wife adored the gentle , graceful girl; and
she loved them dearly . They could not part with her , and at last
adopted her formally as their daughter , with the unwilling consent of
John and Hannah . Yet they knew it was greatly  " for Sylvy ' s
betterment , " as they phrased it; so at last they let her go . 

But when Dolly was a sturdy young woman of twenty-five the war-trumpet
blew , and John and the twins heard it effectually . There was a sudden
leaving of the plow in the furrow . The planting was set aside for the
children to finish , the old musket rubbed up , and with set lips and
resolute eyes the three men walked away one May morning to join the
Nepash company . Hannah kept up her smiling courage through it all . If
her heart gave way , nobody knew it but God and John . The boys she
encouraged and inspired , and the children were shamed out of their
childish tears by mother ' s bright face and cheery talk . 

Then she set them all to work . There was corn to plant , wheat to sow , 
potatoes to set; flax and wool to spin and weave , for clothes would be
needed for all , both absent and stay-at-homes . There was no father to
superintend the outdoor work; so Hannah took the field , and marshalled
her forces on Nepasset Brook much as the commander-in-chief was doing
on a larger scale elsewhere . Eben , the biggest boy , and Joey , who came
next him , were to do all the planting; Diana and Sam took on
themselves the care of the potato patch , the fowls , and the cow; Dolly
must spin and weave when mother left either the wheel or loom to
attend to the general ordering of the forces; while Obed and Betty , 
the younglings of the flock , were detailed to weed , pick vegetables
 ( such few as were raised in the small garden ) , gather berries , herbs , 
nuts , hunt the straying turkeys ' nests , and make themselves generally
useful . At evening all the girls sewed; the boys mended their shoes , 
having learned so much from a travelling cobbler; and the mother
taught them all her small stock of schooling would allow . At least , 
they each knew how to read , and most of them to write , after a very
uncertain fashion . As to spelling , nobody knew how to spell in those
days . . . . But they did know the four simple rules of arithmetic , and
could say the epigrammatic rhymes of the old New England Primer and
the sibyllic formulas of the Assembly ' s Catechism as glibly as the
child of to-day repeats  " The House That Jack Built . " 

So the summer went on . The corn tasselled , the wheat ears filled well , 
the potatoes hung out rich clusters of their delicate and graceful
blossoms , beans straggled half over the garden , the hens did their
duty bravely , and the cow produced a heifer calf . 

Father and the boys were fighting now , and mother ' s merry words were
more rare , though her bright face still wore its smiling courage . They
heard rarely from the army . Now and then a post rider stopped at the
Nepash tavern and brought a few letters or a little news; but this was
at long intervals , and women who watched and waited at home without
constant mail service and telegraphic flashes , aware that news of
disaster , of wounds , of illness , could only reach them too late to
serve or save , and that to reach the ill or the dying involved a
larger and more disastrous journey than the survey of half the world
demands now--these women endured pangs beyond our comprehension , and
endured them with a courage and patience that might have furnished
forth an army of heroes , that did go far to make heroes of that
improvised , ill-conditioned , eager multitude who conquered the trained
bands of their oppressors and set their sons  " free and equal , " to use
their own dubious phraseology , before the face of humanity at large . 

By and by winter came on with all its terrors . By night wolves howled
about the lonely house , and sprung back over the palings when Eben
went to the door with his musket . Joe hauled wood from the forest on a
hand-sled , and Dolly and Diana took it in through the kitchen window
when the drifts were so high that the woodshed door could not be
opened . Besides , all the hens were gathered in there , as well for
greater warmth as for convenience in feeding , and the barn was only to
be reached with snowshoes and entered by the window above the manger . 

Hard times these were . The loom in the garret could not be used , for
even fingers would freeze in that atmosphere; so the thread was wound
off , twisted on the great wheel , and knit into stockings , the boys
learning to fashion their own , while Hannah knit her anxiety and her
hidden heartaches into socks for her soldier boys and their father . 

By another spring the aching and anxiousness were a little dulled , for
habit blunts even the keen edge of mortal pain . They had news that
summer that Ralph had been severely wounded , but had recovered; that
John had gone through a sharp attack of camp-fever; that Reuben was
taken prisoner , but escaped by his own wit . Hannah was thankful and
grateful beyond expression . Perhaps another woman would have wept and
wailed , to think all this had come to pass without her knowledge or
her aid; but it was Hannah ' s way to look at the bright side of things . 
Sylvia would always remember how once , when she was looking at Mount
Tahconic , darkened by a brooding tempest , its crags frowning blackly
above the dark forest at its foot and the lurid cloud above its head
torn by fierce lances of light , she hid her head in her mother ' s
checked apron , in the helpless terror of an imaginative child; but , 
instead of being soothed and pitied , mother had only laughed a little
gay laugh , and said gently , but merrily:

 " Why , Sylvy , the sun ' s right on the other side , only you don ' t see
it . " 

After that she always thought her mother saw the sun when nobody else
could . And in a spiritual sense it was true . 

Parson Everett rode over once or twice from Litchfield that next
summer to fetch Sylvia and to administer comfort to Hannah . He was a
quaint , prim little gentleman , neat as any wren , but mild-mannered as
wrens never are , and in a moderate way kindly and sympathetic . When
the children had haled their lovely sister away to see their rustic
possessions , Parson Everett would sit down in a high chair , lay aside
his cocked hat , spread his silk pocket handkerchief over his knees , 
and prepare to console Hannah . 

 " Mistress Perkins , these are trying times , trying times . There is a
sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry-trees--h-m ! Sea and waves
roaring of a truth--h-m ! h-m ! I trust , Mistress Perkins , you submit to
the Divine Will with meekness . " 

 " Well , I don ' t know , " replied Hannah , with a queer little twinkle in
her eye .  " I don ' t believe I be as meek as Moses , parson . I should like
things fixed different , to speak truth . " 

 " Dear me ! Dear me--h-m ! h-m ! My good woman , the Lord reigneth . You
must submit; you must submit . You know it is the duty of a vessel of
wrath to be broken to pieces if it glorifieth the Maker . " 

 " Well , mebbe  ' tis . I don ' t know much about that kind o ' vessel . I ' ve
got to submit because there ain ' t anything else to do , as I see . I
can ' t say it goes easy--not ' n ' be honest; but I try to look on the
bright side , and to believe the Lord ' ll take care of my folks better ' n
I could , even if they was here . " 

 " H-m ! h-m ! Well , " stammered the embarrassed parson , completely at his
wit ' s end with this cheerful theology ,  " well , I hope it is grace that
sustains you , Mistress Perkins , and not the vain elation of the
natural man . The Lord is in His holy temple; the earth is His
footstool--h-m ! " The parson struggled helplessly with a tangle of
texts here; but the right one seemed to fail him , till Hannah
audaciously put it in:

 " Well , you know what it says about takin ' care of sparrers , in the
Bible , and how we was more valerable than they be , a lot . That kind o ' 
text comes home these times , I tell ye . You fetch a person down to the
bedrock , as Grandsir Penlyn used to say , and then they know where they
be . And ef the Lord is really the Lord of all , I expect He ' ll take
care of all;  ' nd I don ' t doubt but what He is and does . So I can fetch
up on that . " 

Parson Everett heaved a deep sigh , put on his cocked hat , and blew his
nose ceremonially with the silk handkerchief . Not that he needed to:
but as a sort of shaking off of the dust of responsibility and ending
the conversation , which , if it was not heterodox on Hannah ' s part , 
certainly did not seem orthodox to him . . . . He did not try to console
her any more , but contented himself with the stiller spirits in his
own parish , who had grown up in and after his own fashion . 

Another dreadful winter settled down on Nepasset township . There was
food enough in the house and firewood in the shed; but neither food
nor fire seemed to assuage the terrible cold , and with decreased
vitality decreased courage came to all . Hygienics were an unforeseen
mystery to people of that day . They did not know that nourishing food
is as good for the brain as for the muscles . They lived on potatoes , 
beets , beans , with now and then a bit of salt pork or beef boiled in
the pot with the rest; and their hearts failed , as their flesh did , 
with this sodden and monotonous diet . One ghastly night Hannah almost
despaired . She held secret council with Dolly and Eben , while they
inspected the potato bin and the pork barrel , as to whether it would
not be best for them to break up and find homes elsewhere for the
winter . Her father was old and feeble . He would be glad to have her
with him and Betty . The rest were old enough to  " do chores " for their
board , and there were many families where help was needed , both in
Nepash and Litchfield , since every available man had gone to the war
by this time . But while they talked a great scuffling and squawking in
the woodhouse attracted the boys upstairs . Joe seized the tongs and
Diana the broomstick . An intruding weasel was pursued and slaughtered;
but not till two fowls , fat and fine , had been sacrificed by the
invader and the tongs together . The children were all hungry , with
the exhaustion of the cold weather , and clamoured to have these
victims cooked for supper . Nor was Hannah unmoved by the appeal . Her
own appetite seconded . The savoury stew came just in time . It aroused
them to new life and spirits . Hannah regained courage , wondering how
she could have lost heart so far , and said to Dolly , as they washed up
the supper dishes:

 " I guess we ' ll keep together , Dolly . It ' ll be spring after a while , 
and we ' ll stick it out together . " 

 " I guess I would , " answered Dolly .  " And don ' t you believe we should
all feel better to kill off them fowls--all but two or three ? They ' re
master hands to eat corn , and it does seem as though that biled hen
done us all a sight o ' good to-night . Just hear them children . " 

And it certainly was , as Hannah said ,  " musical to hear  ' em . " Joe had a
cornstalk fiddle , and Eben an old singing book , which Diana read over
his shoulder while she kept on knitting her blue sock; and the three
youngsters--Sam , Obed , and Betty--with wide mouths and intent eyes , 
followed Diana ' s  " lining out " of that quaint hymn  " The Old
Israelites , " dwelling with special gusto and power on two of the
verses:

  " We are little ,  ' tis true , 
 And our numbers are few , 
 And the sons of old Anak are tall;
 But while I see a track
 I will never go back , 
 But go on at the risk of my all . 

  " The way is all new , 
 As it opens to view , 
 And behind is the foaming Red Sea;
 So none need to speak
 Of the onions and leeks
 Or to talk about garlics to me ! " 

Hannah ' s face grew brighter still .  " We ' ll stay right here ! " she said , 
adding her voice to the singular old ditty with all her power:

  " What though some in the rear
 Preach up terror and fear , 
 And complain of the trials they meet , 
 Tho ' the giants before
 With great fury do roar , 
 I ' m resolved I can never retreat . " 

And in this spirit , sustained , no doubt , by the occasional chickens , 
they lived the winter out , till blessed , beneficent spring came again , 
and brought news , great news , with it . Not from the army , though . 
There had been a post rider in Nepash during the January thaw , and he
brought short letters only . There was about to be a battle , and there
was no time to write more than assurances of health and good hopes for
the future . Only once since had news reached them from that quarter . A
disabled man from the Nepash company was brought home dying with
consumption . Hannah felt almost ashamed to rejoice in the tidings he
brought of John ' s welfare , when she heard his husky voice , saw his
worn and ghastly countenance , and watched the suppressed agony in his
wife ' s eyes . The words of thankfulness she wanted to speak would have
been so many stabs in that woman ' s breast . It was only when her eight
children rejoiced in the hearing that she dared to be happy . But the
other news was from Sylvia . She was promised to the schoolmaster in
Litchfield . Only to think of it ! Our Sylvy ! 

Master Loomis had been eager to go to the war; but his mother was a
poor bedrid woman , dependent on him for support , and all the
dignitaries of the town combined in advising and urging him to stay at
home for the sake of their children , as well as his mother . So at home
he stayed , and fell into peril of heart , instead of life and limb , 
under the soft fire of Sylvia ' s eyes , instead of the enemy ' s
artillery . Parson Everett could not refuse his consent , though he and
madam were both loth to give up their sweet daughter . But since she
and the youth seemed to be both of one mind about the matter , and he
being a godly young man , of decent parentage , and in a good way of
earning his living , there was no more to be said . They would wait a
year before thinking of marriage , both for better acquaintance and on
account of the troubled times . 

 " Mayhap the times will mend , sir , " anxiously suggested the
schoolmaster to Parson Everett . 

 " I think not , I think not , Master Loomis . There is a great blackness
of darkness in hand , the Philistines be upon us , and there is moving
to and fro . Yea , Behemoth lifteth himself and shaketh his mane--h-m ! 
ah ! h-m ! It is not a time for marrying and giving in marriage , for
playing on sackbuts and dulcimers--h-m ! " 

A quiet smile flickered around Master Loomis ' s mouth as he turned
away , solaced by a shy , sweet look from Sylvia ' s limpid eyes , as he
peeped into the keeping-room , where she sat with madam , on his way
out . He could afford to wait a year for such a spring blossom as that , 
surely . And wait he did , with commendable patience , comforting his
godly soul with the fact that Sylvia was spared meantime the daily
tendance and care of a fretful old woman like his mother; for , though
Master Loomis was the best of sons , that did not blind him to the fact
that the irritability of age and illness were fully developed in his
mother , and he alone seemed to have the power of calming her . She
liked Sylvia at first , but became frantically jealous of her as soon
as she suspected her son ' s attachment . So the summer rolled away . 
Hannah and her little flock tilled their small farm and gathered
plenteous harvest . Mindful of last year ' s experience , they raised
brood after brood of chickens , and planted extra acres of corn for
their feeding , so that when autumn came , with its vivid , splendid
days , its keen winds and turbulent skies , the new chicken yard , which
the boys had worked at through the summer , with its wattled fence , its
own tiny spring , and lofty covered roofs , swarmed with chickens , 
ducks , and turkeys . Many a dollar was brought home about Thanksgiving
time for the fat fowls sold in Litchfield and Nepash; but dollars
soon vanished in buying winter clothes for so many children , or
rather , in buying wool to spin and weave for them . Mahala Green , the
village tailoress , came to fashion the garments , and the girls sewed
them . Uncouth enough was their aspect; but fashion did not yet reign
in Nepash , and if they were warm , who cared for elegance ? Not Hannah ' s
rosy , hearty , happy brood . They sang and whistled and laughed with a
force and freedom that was kin to the birds and squirrels among whom
they lived; and Hannah ' s kindly , cheery face lit up as she heard them , 
while a half sigh told that her husband and her soldier boys were
still wanting to her perfect contentment . 

At last they were all housed snugly for winter . The woodpile was
larger than ever before , and all laid up in the shed , beyond which a
rough shelter of chinked logs had been put up for the chickens , to
which their roosts and nest boxes , of coarse wicker , boards nailed
together , hollow bark from the hemlock logs , even worn-out tin pails , 
had all been transferred . The cellar had been well banked from the
outside , and its darksome cavern held good store of apples , pork , and
potatoes . There was dried beef in the stairway , squashes in the
cupboard , flour in the pantry , and the great gentle black cow in the
barn was a wonderful milker . In three weeks Thanksgiving would come , 
and even Hannah ' s brave heart sank as she thought of her absent
husband and boys; and their weary faces rose up before her as she
numbered over to herself her own causes for thankfulness , as if to
say:  " Can you keep Thanksgiving without us ? " Poor Hannah ! She did her
best to set these thankless thoughts aside , but almost dreaded the
coming festival . One night , as she sat knitting by the fire , a special
messenger from Litchfield rode up to the door and brought stirring
news . Master Loomis ' s mother was dead , and the master himself , seeing
there was a new levy of troops , was now going to the war . But before
he went there was to be a wedding , and , in the good old fashion , it
should be on Thanksgiving Day , and Madam Everett had bidden as many of
Sylvy ' s people to the feast as would come . 

There was great excitement as Hannah read aloud the madam ' s note . The
tribe of Perkins shouted for joy , but a sudden chill fell on them when
mother spoke:

 " Now , children , hush up ! I want to speak myself , ef it ' s a possible
thing to git in a word edgeways . We can ' t all go , fust and foremost . 
 ' Tain ' t noways possible . " 

 " Oh , Mother ! Why ? Oh , do ! Not go to Sylvy ' s wedding ? " burst in the
 " infinite deep chorus " of youngsters . 

 " No , you can ' t . There ain ' t no team in the county big enough to hold
ye all , if ye squeeze ever so much . I ' ve got to go , for Sylvy ' d be
beat out if mother didn ' t come . And Dolly ' s the oldest . She ' s got a
right to go . " 

Loud protest was made against the right of primogeniture , but mother
was firm . 

 " Says so in the Bible . Leastways , Bible folks always acted so . The
first-born , ye know . Dolly ' s goin ' , sure . Eben ' s got to drive , and I
must take Obed . He ' d be the death of somebody , with his everlastin ' 
mischief , if I left him to home . Mebbe I can squeeze in Betty , to keep
him company . Joe and Sam and Dianner won ' t be more ' n enough to take
care o ' the cows and chickens and fires , and all . Likewise of each
other . " 

Sam set up a sudden howl at his sentence , and kicked the mongrel
yellow puppy , who leaped on him to console him , till that
long-suffering beast yelped in concert . 

Diana sniffed and snuffled , scrubbed her eyes with her checked apron , 
and rocked back and forth . 

 " Now , stop it ! " bawled Joe .  " For the land ' s sake , quit all this noise . 
We can ' t all on us go;  ' n ' for my part , I don ' t want to . We ' ll hev a
weddin ' of our own some day ! " and here he gave a sly look at Dolly , 
who seemed to understand it and blushed like an apple-blossom , while
Joe went on:  " Then we ' ll all stay to  ' t , I tell ye , and have a right
down old country time . " 

Mother had to laugh . 

 " So you shall , Joe , and dance  ' Money Musk ' all night , if you want
to--same as you did to the corn huskin ' . Now , let ' s see . Betty , she ' s
got that chintz gown that was your Sunday best , Dolly--the flowered
one , you know , that Dianner outgrowed . We must fix them lawn ruffles
into  ' t; and there ' s a blue ribbin laid away in my chest o ' drawers
that ' ll tie her hair . It ' s dreadful lucky we ' ve got new shoes all
round; and Obed ' s coat and breeches is as good as new , if they be made
out of his pa ' s weddin ' suit . That ' s the good o ' good cloth . It ' ll
last most forever . Joe hed  ' em first , then Sam wore  ' em quite a spell , 
and they cut over jest right for Obey . My black paduasoy can be fixed
up , I guess . But , my stars ! Dolly , what hev ' you got ? " 

 " Well , Mother , you know I ain ' t got a real good gown . There ' s the
black lutestring petticoat Sylvy fetched me two years ago; but there
ain ' t any gown to it . We calculated I could wear that linsey jacket to
meeting , under my coat; but  ' twouldn ' t do rightly for a weddin ' . " 

 " That ' s gospel truth . You can ' t wear that , anyhow . You ' ve got to hev
somethin ' .  ' Twon ' t do to go to Sylvy ' s weddin ' in linsey woolsy; but I
don ' t believe there ' s more ' n two hard dollars in the house . There ' s a
few Continentals; but I don ' t count on them . Joe , you go over to the
mill fust thing in the morning and ask Sylvester to lend me his old
mare a spell to-morrer , to ride over to Nepash , to the store . " 

 " Why don ' t ye send Doll ? " asked Joe , with a wicked glance at the girl
that set her blushing again . 

 " Hold your tongue , Joseph ,  ' n ' mind me . It ' s bedtime now , but I ' ll
wake ye up airly , " energetically remarked Hannah . And next day , 
equipped in cloak and hood , she climbed the old mare ' s fat sides and
jogged off on her errand; and by noon-mark was safe and sound home
again , looking a little perplexed , but by no means cast down . 

 " Well , Dolly , " said she , as soon as cloak and hood were laid aside , 
 " there ' s the beautifulest piece of chintz over to the store you ever
see--jest enough for a gown . It ' s kind of buff-coloured ground , 
flowered all over with roses , deep-red roses , as nateral as life . 
Squire Dart wouldn ' t take no money for  ' t . He ' s awful sharp about them
new bills . Sez they ain ' t no more ' n corn husks . Well , we ain ' t got a
great lot of  ' em , so there ' s less to lose , and some folks will take
 ' em; but he ' ll let me have the chintz for  ' leven yards o ' soldier ' s
cloth--blue , ye know , like what we sent pa and the boys . And I spent
them two silver dollars on a white gauze neck-kercher and a piece of
red satin ribbin for ye , for I ' m set on that chintz . Now hurry up  ' nd
fix the loom right off . The web ' s ready , then we ' ll card the wool . 
I ' ll lay ye a penny we ' ll have them  ' leven yards wove by Friday . 
To-day ' s Tuesday , Thanksgiving comes a Thursday week , an ' ef we have
the chintz by sundown a Saturday there ' ll be good store of time for
Mahaly Green and you to make it afore Wednesday night . We ' ll hev a
kind of a Thanksgiving , after all . But I wisht your pa---- " The
sentence ended in Hannah ' s apron at her eyes , and Dolly looked sober;
but in a minute she dimpled and brightened , for the pretty chintz gown
was more to her than half a dozen costly French dresses to a girl of
to-day . But a little cloud suddenly put out the dimples . 

 " But , Mother , if somebody else should buy it ? " 

 " Oh , they won ' t . I ' ve fixed that . I promised to fetch the cloth inside
of a week , and Squire Dart laid away the chintz for me till that time . 
Fetch the wool , Dolly , before you set up the web , so ' s I can start . " 

The wool was carded , spun , washed , and put into the dye tub , one  " run " 
of yarn that night; and another spun and washed by next day ' s
noon--for the stuff was to be checked , and black wool needed no
dyeing . Swiftly hummed the wheel , merrily flew the shuttle , and the
house steamed with inodorous dye; but nobody cared for that , if the
cloth could only be finished . And finished it was--the full measure
and a yard over; and on Saturday morning Sylvester ' s horse was
borrowed again , and Hannah came back from the village beaming with
pleasure , and bringing besides the chintz a yard of real cushion lace , 
to trim the ruffles for Dolly ' s sleeves , for which she had bartered
the over yard of cloth and two dozen fresh eggs . Then even busier
times set in . Mahala Green had already arrived , for she was dressmaker
as well as tailoress , and was sponging and pressing over the black
paduasoy that had once been dove-coloured and was Hannah ' s sole piece
of wedding finery , handed down from her grandmother ' s wardrobe at
that . A dark green grosgrain petticoat and white lawn ruffles made a
sufficiently picturesque attire for Hannah , whose well-silvered hair
set off her still sparkling eyes and clear healthy skin . She appeared
in this unwonted finery on Thanksgiving morning to her admiring
family , having added a last touch of adornment by a quaint old jet
necklace , that glittered on the pure lawn neckkerchief with as good
effect as a chain of diamonds and much more fitness . Betty , in her
striped blue-and-white chintz , a clean dimity petticoat , and a blue
ribbon round her short brown curls , looked like a cabbage rosebud--so
sturdy and wholesome and rosy that no more delicate symbol suits her . 

Obed was dreadful in the old-fashioned costume of coat and breeches , 
ill-fitting and shiny with wear , and his freckled face and round shock head
of tan-coloured hair thrown into full relief by a big , square collar of
coarse tatten lace laid out on his shoulders like a barber ' s towel , and
illustrating the great red ears that stood out at right angles above it . 
But Obed was only a boy . He was not expected to be more than clean and
speechless; and , to tell the truth , Eben , being in the hobbledehoy stage of
boyhood--gaunt , awkward , and self-sufficient--rather surpassed his small
brother in unpleasant aspect and manner . But who would look at the boys
when Dolly stood beside them , as she did now , tall and slender , with the
free grace of an untrammelled figure , her small head erect , her eyes dark
and soft as a deer ' s , neatly clothed feet  ( not too small for her height ) 
peeping from under the black lutestring petticoat , and her glowing brunette
complexion set off by the picturesque buff-and-garnet chintz gown , while
her round throat and arms were shaded by delicate gauze and snowy lace , 
and about her neck lay her mother ' s gold beads , now and then tangling in
the heavy black curls that , tied high on her head with a garnet ribbon , 
still dropped in rich luxuriance to her trim waist . 

The family approved of Dolly , no doubt , though their phrases of
flattery were as homely as heartfelt . 

 " Orful slick-lookin ' , ain ' t she ? " confided Joe to Eben; while sinful
Sam shrieked out:  " Land o ' Goshen ! ain ' t our Dolly smart ? Shan ' t I
fetch Sylvester over ? " 

For which I regret to state Dolly smartly boxed his ears . 

But the pung was ready , and Sam ' s howls had to die out uncomforted . 
With many parting charges from Hannah about the fires and fowls , the
cow , the hasty pudding , already put on for its long boil , and the
turkey that hung from a string in front of the fire and must be
watched well , since it was the Thanksgiving dinner , the  " weddingers , " 
as Joe called them , were well packed in with blankets and hot stones
and set off on their long drive . 

The day was fair and bright , the fields of snow purely dazzling; but
the cold was fearful , and in spite of all their wraps , the keen winds
that whistled over those broad hilltops where the road lay seemed to
pierce their very bones , and they were heartily glad to draw up , by
twelve o ' clock , at the door of the parsonage and be set before a
blazing fire , and revived with sundry mugs of foaming and steaming
flip , made potent with a touch of old peach brandy; for in those
ancient days , even in parsonages , the hot poker knew its office and
sideboards were not in vain . 

There was food , also , for the exhausted guests , though the refection
was slight and served informally in the kitchen corner , for the
ceremonial Thanksgiving dinner was to be deferred till after the
wedding . And as soon as all were warmed and refreshed they were
ushered into the great parlour , where a Turkey carpet , amber satin
curtains , spider-legged chairs and tables , and a vast carved sofa , 
cushioned also with amber , made a regal and luxurious show in the eyes
of our rustic observers . 

But when Sylvy came in with the parson , who could look at furniture ? 
Madam Everett had lavished her taste and her money on the lovely
creature as if she were her own daughter , for she was almost as dear
to that tender , childless soul . The girl ' s lustrous gold-brown hair
was dressed high upon her head in soft puffs and glittering curls , and
a filmy thread-lace scarf pinned across it with pearl-headed pins . Her
white satin petticoat showed its rich lustre under a lutestring gown
of palest rose brocaded with silver sprigs and looped with silver
ribbon and pink satin roses . Costly lace clung about her neck and
arms , long kid gloves covered her little hands and wrists and met the
delicate sleeve ruffles , and about her white throat a great pink topaz
clasped a single string of pearls . Hannah could scarce believe her
eyes . Was this her Sylvy ? --she who even threw Madam Everett , with her
velvet dress , powdered hair , and Mechlin laces , quite into the
background ! 

 " I did not like it , Mammy dear , " whispered Sylvy , as she clung round
her astonished mother ' s neck .  " I wanted a muslin gown; but madam had
laid this by long ago , and I could not thwart or grieve her , she is so
very good to me . " 

 " No more you could , Sylvy . The gown is amazing fine , to be sure; but
as long as my Sylvy ' s inside of it I won ' t gainsay the gown . It ain ' t
a speck too pretty for the wearer , dear . " And Hannah gave her another
hug . The rest scarce dared to touch that fair face , except Dolly , who
threw her arms about her beautiful sister , with little thought of her
garments , but a sudden passion of love and regret sending the quick
blood to her dark brows and wavy hair in a scarlet glow . 

Master Loomis looked on with tender eyes . He felt the usual masculine
conviction that nobody loved Sylvy anywhere near as much as he did;
but it pleased him to see that she was dear to her family . The parson , 
however , abruptly put an end to the scene . 

 " H-m ! my dear friends , let us recollect ourselves . There is a time for
all things . Yea , earth yieldeth her increase--h-m ! The Lord ariseth to
shake visibly the earth--ahem ! Sylvia , will you stand before the
sophy ? Master Lummis on the right side . Let us pray . " 

But even as he spoke the words a great knocking pealed through the
house: the brass lion ' s head on the front door beat a reveille loud
and long . The parson paused , and Sylvia grew whiter than before;
while Decius , the parson ' s factotum , a highly respectable old negro
 ( who , with his wife and daughter , sole servants of the house , had
stolen in to see the ceremony ) , ambled out to the vestibule in most
undignified haste . There came sounds of dispute , much tramping of
boots , rough voices , and quick words; then a chuckle from Decius , the
parlour door burst open , and three bearded , ragged , eager men rushed
in upon the little ceremony . 

There was a moment ' s pause of wonder and doubt , then a low cry from
Hannah , as she flew into her husband ' s arms; and in another second the
whole family had closed around the father and brothers , and for once
the hardy , stern , reticent New England nature , broken up from its
foundations , disclosed its depths of tenderness and fidelity . There
were tears , choking sobs , cries of joy . The madam held her lace
handkerchief to her eyes with real need of it; Master Loomis choked
for sympathy; and the parson blew his nose on the ceremonial bandanna
like the trumpet of a cavalry charge . 

 " Let us pray ! " said he , in a loud but broken voice; and holding fast
to the back of the chair , he poured out his soul and theirs before the
Lord with all the fervour and the fluency of real feeling . There was
no stumbling over misapplied texts now , no awkward objections in his
throat , but only glowing Bible words of thankfulness and praise and
joy . And every heart was uplifted and calm as they joined in the
 " Amen . " 

John ' s story was quickly told . Their decimated regiment was
disbanded , to be reformed of fresh recruits , and a long furlough given
to the faithful but exhausted remnant . They had left at once for home , 
and their shortest route lay through Litchfield . Night was near when
they reached the town , but they must needs stop to get one glimpse of
Sylvy and tidings from home , for fear lay upon them lest there might
be trouble there which they knew not of . So they burst in upon the
wedding . But Master Loomis began to look uneasy . Old Dorcas had
slipped out , to save the imperilled dinner , and Pokey , the maid  ( _née_
Pocahontas ! ) could be heard clinking glass and silver and pushing
about chairs; but the happy family were still absorbed in each other . 

 " Mister Everett ! " said the madam , with dignity , and the little
minister trotted rapturously over to her chair to receive certain low
orders . 

 " Yes , verily , yes--h-m ! A--my friends , we are assembled in this place
this evening-- " 

A sharp look from madam recalled him to the fact that this was not a
prayer-meeting . 

 " A--that is--yes , of a truth our purpose this afternoon was to-- " 

 " That ' s so ! " energetically put in Captain John .  " Right about face ! 
Form ! " and the three Continentals sprung to their feet and assumed
their position , while Sylvy and Master Loomis resumed theirs , a
flitting smile in Sylvia ' s tearful eyes making a very rainbow . 

So the ceremony proceeded to the end , and was wound up with a short
prayer , concerning which Captain Perkins irreverently remarked to his
wife some days after:

 " Parson smelt the turkey , sure as shootin ' , Hannah . He shortened up so
 ' mazin ' quick on that prayer . I tell you I was glad on ' t . I knew how
he felt . I could ha ' ate a wolf myself . " 

Then they all moved in to the dinner table--a strange group , from
Sylvia ' s satin and pearls to the ragged fatigue-dress of her father
and brothers; but there was no help for that now , and really it
troubled nobody . The shade of anxiety in madam ' s eye was caused only
by a doubt as to the sufficiency of her supplies for three unexpected
and ravenous guests; but a look at the mighty turkey , the crisp roast
pig , the cold ham , the chicken pie , and the piles of smoking
vegetables , with a long vista of various pastries , apples , nuts , and
pitchers of cider on the buffet , and an inner consciousness of a big
Indian pudding , for twenty-four hours simmering in the pot over the
fire , reassured her , and perhaps heartened up the parson , for after a
long grace he still kept his feet and added , with a kindly smile:

 " Brethren and friends , you are heartily welcome . Eat and be glad , for
seldom hath there been such cause and need to keep a Thanksgiving ! " 

And they all said Amen ! 




1800 AND FROZE TO DEATH[31]

BY C . A . STEPHENS . 

 An exciting story of a battle with a crazy moose . It has a
 Thanksgiving flavour , too . 


 " What shall we have for Thanksgiving dinner ? " was a question which
distressed more than one household that year . Indeed , it was often a
question what to have for dinner , supper , or breakfast on any day . For
that was the strangely unpropitious , unproductive season of 1816 , 
quaintly known in local annals as  " 1800 and Froze to Death . " 

[ 31: From the _Youth ' s Companion_ , November 26 , 1908 . ]

It was shortly after the close of the War of 1812 with England . Our
country was then poor and but little cultivated . There was no golden
West to send carloads of wheat and corn; no Florida or California to
send fruit; there were no cars , no railroads . What the people of the
Eastern States had they must raise for themselves , and that year there
were no crops . 

Nothing grew , nothing ripened properly . Winter lingered even in the
lap of May . As late as the middle of June there was a heavy snowstorm
in New England . Frosts occurred every fortnight of the season . The
seed potatoes , corn , and beans , when planted , either rotted in the
ground or came up to be killed by the frosts . The cold continued
through July and August . A little barley , still less wheat and rye , a
few oats , in favourable situations , were the only cereals harvested , 
and these were much pinched in the kernel . 

Actual starvation threatened hundreds of farmers ' families as this
singular summer and autumn advanced . The corn crop , then the main
staple in the East , was wholly cut off . Two and three dollars a
bushel--equal to ten dollars to-day--were paid for corn that year--by
those who had the money to purchase it . Many of the poorer families
subsisted in part on the boiled sprouts of raspberry and other shrubs . 
Starving children stole forth into the fields of the less indigent
farmers by night , and dug up the seed potatoes and sprouted corn to
eat raw . 

Moreover , there appeared to be little or no game in the forest; many
roving bears were seen , and wolves were bold . All wild animals , 
indeed , behaved abnormally , as if they , too , felt that nature was out
of joint . The eggs of the grouse or partridge failed to hatch; even
woodchucks were lean and scarce . So of the brooding hens at the
settler ' s barn: the eggs would not hatch , and the hens , too , it is
said , gave up laying eggs , perhaps from lack of food . Even the song
birds fell into the  " dumps " and neglected to rear young . 

The dreary , fruitless autumn drew on; and Thanksgiving Day bade fair
to be such a hollow mockery that in several states the governors did
not issue proclamations . 

Maine at that time was a part of the state of Massachusetts . My
impression is that the governor appointed November 28th as
Thanksgiving Day , but I am not sure . It is likely that not much
unction attended the announcement . The notices of it did not reach
many localities in Maine . In the neighbourhood where my grandparents
lived , in Oxford County , nothing was heard of it; but at a schoolhouse
meeting , on November 21st , our nearest neighbour , Jonas Edwards , made
a motion  " that the people of the place keep the 28th of the month as
Thanksgiving Day--the best they could . " 

The motion prevailed; and then the poor housewives began to ask the
question ,  " What shall we have for Thanksgiving dinner ? " At our house
it is still remembered that one of my young great-uncles cried in
reply ,  " Oh , if we could only have a good big johnnycake ! " 

And it was either that very night , or the night after , that the
exciting news came of the arrival of a shipload of corn at Bath and
Brunswick . 

At Brunswick , seat of the then infant Bowdoin College , Freeport , 
Topsham , and other towns near the coast of Maine , where the people
were interested in maritime ventures , it had become known that a
surplus of corn was raised in Cuba , and could be purchased at a fair
price . An old schooner , commanded by one Capt . John Simmons , was
fitted out to sail for a cargo of the precious cereal . For three
months not a word was heard from schooner or skipper . 

Captain Simmons had purchased corn , however , and loaded his crazy old
craft full to the deck with it . Heavy weather and head winds held him
back on his voyage home . Water got to the corn , and some of it swelled
to such an extent that the old schooner was like to burst . But it got
in at last , early in November , with three thousand bushels of this
West India corn . 

How the news of this argosy flew even to towns a day ' s journey up from
the coast ! 

A great hunger for corncake swept through that part of the state; and
in our own little neighbourhood a searching canvass of the resources
of the five log farm-houses followed . As a result of it , young
Jonathan Edwards and my then equally youthful Great-uncle Nathaniel
set off the next day to drive to Brunswick with a span of old white
horses hitched in a farm wagon without springs , carrying four rather
poor sheep , four bushels of barley , and fifteen pounds of wool , which
they hoped to exchange for five bushels of that precious corn . On top
of it all there were three large bagfuls of hay for the horses . The
boys also took an axe and an old flintlock gun , for much of the way
was then through forest . 

It was a long day ' s drive for horses in poor condition , but they
reached Brunswick that night . There , however , they found the cargo of
corn so nearly sold out , or bartered away , that they were able to get
but three bushels to bring home . 

The corn was reckoned at nine dollars , the four sheep at only six
dollars , and it had been difficult  " dickering " the fifteen pounds of
wool and the two bushels of barley as worth three dollars more . The
extra two bushels of barley went for their keep overnight . Such was
produce exchange in 1816 . 

The next morning they started for home , lightly loaded with their
dearly bought corn . Their route lay along the Androscoggin River , and
they had got as far on their way as the present factory town of
Auburn , where the Little Androscoggin flows into the larger river of
the same name , when they had an adventure which resulted in very
materially increasing the weight of their load . 

It was a raw , cloudy day , and had begun to  " spit snow " ; and as it drew
toward noon , they stopped beside the road at a place where a large
pine and several birches leaned out from the brink of the deep gorge
through which the Little Androscoggin flows to join the larger stream . 
Here they fed their horses on the last of the three bagfuls of hay , 
but had nothing to cook or eat in the way of food themselves . The
weather was chilly , and my young Great-uncle Nathaniel said to
Jonathan:

 " If you will get some dry birchbark , I will flash the pan . We will
kindle a fire and warm up . " 

Jonathan brought the bark , and meanwhile Nathaniel drew the charge
from the old  " Queen ' s arm , " then ignited some powder in the pan with
the flintlock , and started a blaze going . 

The blaze , however , had soon to be fed with dry fuel , and noticing a
dead firtop lying on the ground a few steps away , Jonathan took the
axe and ran to break it up; and the axe strokes among the dry stuff
made a considerable crackling . 

Throwing down the axe at last , Jonathan gathered up a large armful of
the dry branches , and had turned to the fire , when they both heard a
strange sound , like a deep grunt , not far away , followed by sharp
crashes of the brush down in the basin . 

 " What ' s that ? " Nathaniel exclaimed .  " It ' s a bear I guess , " and he
snatched up the empty gun to reload it . Jonathan , too , threw down his
armful of boughs and turned back to get the axe . 

Before they could do either , however , the strange grunts and crashes
came nearer , and a moment later a pair of broad antlers and a huge
black head appeared , coming up from the gorge . 

At sight of the snorting beast , Jonathan turned suddenly .  " It ' s a
moose , Nat ! " he cried .  " A big bull moose ! Shoot him ! Shoot him ! " 

Nat was making frantic efforts , but the gun was not reloaded . 
Recharging an old  " Queen ' s arm " was a work of time . 

Fortunately for the boys , the attention of the moose was full fixed on
the horses . With another furious snort , it gained the top of the bank
and bounded toward where they stood hitched , chewing their hay . 

The tired white horses looked up suddenly from their hay , and
perceiving this black apparition of the forest , snorted and tugged at
their halters . 

With a frightful bellow , half squeal , half roar , the moose rose twelve
feet tall on his hind legs , and rushed at the one hitched nearest . The
horse broke its halter , ran headlong against its mate , recoiled , 
bumped into a tree trunk , and then--the trees standing thick in front
of it--backed over the bank and went out of sight down the bluff , the
moose bounding after it , still bellowing hoarsely . 

The other horse had also broken its halter and ran off , while the two
boys stood amazed and alarmed at this tremendous exhibition of animal
ferocity . 

 " Nat ! Nat ! He will kill that horse ! " Jonathan exclaimed , and they both
ran to look over the bank . Horse and moose were now down near the
water , where the river ran deep and swift under the steep bank , the
horse trying vainly to escape through the tangled alder brush , the
moose savagely pursuing . 

The sight roused the boys to save their horse . Axe in hand , Jonathan
ran and slid down the bluff side , catching hold of trees and bushes as
he did so , to keep from going quite into the river . Nat followed him , 
with the gun which he had hastily primed . Both horse and moose were
now thrashing amidst the alder clumps . 

 " Shoot him , shoot him ! " Jonathan shouted .  " Why don ' t you fire ? Oh , let
me have that gun ! " 

It is not as easy as an onlooker often thinks to shoot an animal , even
a large one , in rapid motion , particularly among trees and brush;
something constantly gets in the way . Both animals were now tearing
along the brink of the deep stream , stumbling headlong one second , up
the next , plunging on . As often as Nat tried to steady himself on the
steep side of the bluff for a shot , either the horse was in the way or
both animals were wholly concealed by the bushes . Moreover , the boys
had to run fast through the brush to keep them in sight . Nat could not
shoot with certainty , and Jonathan grew wild over the delay . 

 " Shoot him yourself , then ! " Nat retorted , panting . 

Jonathan snatched the gun and dashed forward , Nat picking up the axe
and following after . On they ran for several hundred yards , barely
keeping pace with the animals . Jonathan experienced quite as much
difficulty in getting a shot as Nat had done . 

At last he aimed and snapped--and the gun did not go off . 

 " You never primed it ! " he exclaimed indignantly . Nat thought that he
had done so , but was not wholly certain; and feeling that he must do
his part somehow , he now dashed past Jonathan , and running on , 
attempted to head the horse off at a little gully down the bank to
which they had now come . It was a brushy place; he fell headlong into
it himself , and rolled down , still grasping hard at the axe . He was
close upon the horse now , within a few yards of the water , and looking
up , he saw the moose ' s head among the alder brush . The creature
appeared to be staring at him , and regaining his feet , much excited , 
Nat threw the axe with all his strength at the moose ' s head . 

By chance rather than skill , the poll of the axe struck the animal
just above the eyes at the root of the antlers . It staggered , holding
its head to one side a moment , as if half-stunned or in pain . Then , 
recovering , it snorted , and with a bound through the brush , jumped
into the stream , and either swam or waded across to the low sandy bank
on the other side . There it stood , still shaking its head . 

Jonathan had caught up with Nat by this time , and they both stood
watching the moose for some moments , hoping that the mad animal had
now had enough of the fracas and would go his way . The horse was in
the brush of the little gully , sticking fast there , or tired out by
its exertions; and they now began considering how they could best
extricate it and get it back up the bluff . 

Just then , however , their other horse neighed long and shrill from the
top of the bank , calling to its mate . The frightened horse beside them
neighed back in reply . 

These equine salutations produced an unexpected result . Another hoarse
snort and a splash of the water was the response from across the
stream . 

 " He ' s coming again ! " exclaimed Jonathan .  " Have you got the
powder-horn , Nat ? Give it to me quick , if you ' ve got it ! " Nathaniel
had had the powder-horn up on the bank , but had dropped it there , or
lost it out of his pocket in his scramble down the bluff . 

There was no time to search for it . The moose was plunging through
the narrow stream , and a moment later sprang ashore and came bounding
up the gully toward the horse . 

The boys shouted to frighten him off . The crazy creature appeared
neither to hear nor heed . Jonathan hastily took refuge behind a rock;
Nat jumped to cover of a tree trunk . 

In his rush at the horse , the moose passed close to them . Again Nat
hurled the axe at the animal ' s side . Jonathan , snatching up a heavy
stone , threw it with all his might . The horse , too , wheeling in the
narrow bed of the gully , kicked spitefully , lashing out its iron-shod
hoofs again and again , planting them hard on the moose ' s front . 

For some moments this singular combat raged there . Recovering the axe
and coming up behind the animal , Nat now attempted to deal a blow . The
moose wheeled , however , as if struck by sudden panic , and went clear
over Nat , who was thrown headlong and slid down into the water . 

The moose bounded clear over him , and again went splashing through the
Little Androscoggin to the other side , where it turned as before , 
shaking its antlers and rending the brush with them . 

Nathaniel had caught hold of a bush , and thus saved himself from going
fully into the swift current . Jonathan helped him get out , and the two
young fellows stared at each other . The encounter had given them proof
of the mad strength and energy of the moose . 

 " Oh , if we could only find that powder-horn somewhere ! " Jonathan
exclaimed . 

The horse up on the bluff sent forth again its shrill neigh , to which
the one beside them responded . 

And just as before , the moose , with an awful bellow , came plunging
through the little river and bounding up the gully . 

 " My soul ! Here he comes again ! " Jonathan fairly yelled .  " Get out o ' 
the way ! " 

And Nat got out of the way as quickly as possible , taking refuge
behind the same rock in the side of the gully . 

Again the place resounded to a frightful medley of squeals , 
bellowings , and crashes in the brush . This time Jonathan had caught up
the axe , and approaching the furious mêlée of whirling hoofs and
gnashing teeth from one side , attempted to get in a blow . In their
wild movements the enraged animals nearly ran over him , but he struck
and stumbled . 

The blow missed the moose ' s head , but fell on the animal ' s foreleg , 
just below the knee , and broke the bone . The moose reared , and
wheeling on its hind legs , plunged down the gully , falling partly into
the river , much as Nat had done . 

A dozen times it now struggled to get up , almost succeeding , but fell
back each time . With the ardour of battle still glowing in him , 
Jonathan rushed forward with the axe , and finally managed to deal the
moose a deathblow; with a knife they then bled it , and stood by , 
triumphant . 

 " We ' ve muttoned him ! We ' ve muttoned him ! " Nat shouted .  " But I never
had such a fight as that before . " 

The horse , as it proved , was not seriously injured , but they were
obliged to cut away the alder brush in the gully to get the animal
back up the bluff , and were occupied for fully an hour doing so . 

The body of the moose was a huge one; it must have weighed fully
fourteen hundred pounds . The boys could no more have moved it than
they could move a mountain . Moreover , it was now beginning to snow
fine and fast . 

Jonathan had a fairly good knife , however , and by using the axe they
succeeded in rudely butchering the carcass and dismembering it . Even
then the quarters were so heavy that their full strength was required
to drag them up the bluff and load them into the wagon . The head , with
its broad , branching antlers , was all that they could lift to the top
of their now bulky load . 

The task had taken till past four o ' clock of that stormy November
afternoon . Twilight was upon them , the wintry twilight of a snowstorm , 
before they made start; and it was long past midnight when they
finally plodded home . 

There were corncake and moose venison for Thanksgiving dinner . ﻿There was once a child , and he strolled about a good deal , and thought
of a number of things . He had a sister , who was a child too , and his
constant companion . These two used to wonder all day long . They
wondered at the beauty of the flowers; they wondered at the height and
blueness of the sky; they wondered at the depth of the bright water;
they wondered at the goodness and the power of God who made the lovely
world . 

They used to say to one another , sometimes , supposing all the children
upon earth were to die , would the flowers , and the water , and the sky
be sorry ? They believed they would be sorry . For , said they , the buds
are the children of the flowers , and the little playful streams that
gambol down the hill-sides are the children of the water; and the
smallest bright specks playing at hide and seek in the sky all night , 
must surely be the children of the stars; and they would all be
grieved to see their playmates , the children of men , no more . 

There was one clear shining star that used to come out in the sky
before the rest , near the church spire , above the graves . It was
larger and more beautiful , they thought , than all the others , and
every night they watched for it , standing hand in hand at a window . 
Whoever saw it first cried out ,  " I see the star ! " And often they cried
out both together , knowing so well when it would rise , and where . So
they grew to be such friends with it , that , before lying down in their
beds , they always looked out once again , to bid it good-night; and
when they were turning round to sleep , they used to say ,  " God bless
the star ! " 

But while she was still very young , oh very , very young , the sister
drooped , and came to be so weak that she could no longer stand in the
window at night; and then the child looked sadly out by himself , and
when he saw the star , turned round and said to the patient pale face
on the bed ,  " I see the star ! " and then a smile would come upon the
face , and a little weak voice used to say ,  " God bless my brother and
the star ! " 

And so the time came all too soon ! when the child looked out alone , 
and when there was no face on the bed; and when there was a little
grave among the graves , not there before; and when the star made long
rays down toward him , as he saw it through his tears . 

Now , these rays were so bright , and they seemed to make such a shining
way from earth to Heaven , that when the child went to his solitary
bed , he dreamed about the star; and dreamed that , lying where he was , 
he saw a train of people taken up that sparkling road by angels . And
the star , opening , showed him a great world of light , where many more
such angels waited to receive them . 

All these angels , who were waiting , turned their beaming eyes upon the
people who were carried up into the star; and some came out from the
long rows in which they stood , and fell upon the people ' s necks , and
kissed them tenderly , and went away with them down avenues of light , 
and were so happy in their company , that lying in his bed he wept for
joy . 

But , there were many angels who did not go with them , and among them
one he knew . The patient face that once had lain upon the bed was
glorified and radiant , but his heart found out his sister among all
the host . 

His sister ' s angel lingered near the entrance of the star , and said to
the leader among those who had brought the people thither:

 " Is my brother come ? " 

And he said  " No . " 

She was turning hopefully away , when the child stretched out his arms , 
and cried ,  " O , sister , I am here ! Take me ! " and then she turned her
beaming eyes upon him , and it was night; and the star was shining into
the room , making long rays down towards him as he saw it through his
tears . 

From that hour forth , the child looked out upon the star as on the
home he was to go to , when his time should come; and he thought that
he did not belong to the earth alone , but to the star too , because of
his sister ' s angel gone before . 

There was a baby born to be a brother to the child; and while he was
so little that he never yet had spoken word he stretched his tiny form
out on his bed , and died . 

Again the child dreamed of the open star , and of the company of
angels , and the train of people , and the rows of angels with their
beaming eyes all turned upon those people ' s faces . 

Said his sister ' s angel to the leader:

 " Is my brother come ? " 

And he said  " Not that one , but another . " 

As the child beheld his brother ' s angel in her arms , he cried ,  " O , 
sister , I am here ! Take me ! " And she turned and smiled upon him , and
the star was shining . 

He grew to be a young man , and was busy at his books when an old
servant came to him and said:

 " Thy mother is no more . I bring her blessing on her darling son ! " 

Again at night he saw the star , and all that former company . Said his
sister ' s angel to the leader:

 " Is my brother come ? " 

And he said ,  " Thy mother ! " 

A mighty cry of joy went forth through all the star , because the
mother was reunited to her two children . And he stretched out his arms
and cried ,  " O , mother , sister , and brother , I am here ! Take me ! " And
they answered him ,  " Not yet , " and the star was shining . 

He grew to be a man , whose hair was turning gray , and he was sitting
in his chair by the fireside , heavy with grief , and with his face
bedewed with tears , when the star opened once again . 

Said his sister ' s angel to the leader:  " Is my brother come ? " 

And he said ,  " Nay , but his maiden daughter . " 

And the man who had been the child saw his daughter , newly lost to
him , a celestial creature among those three , and he said ,  " My
daughter ' s head is on my sister ' s bosom , and her arm is around my
mother ' s neck , and at her feet there is the baby of old time , and I
can bear the parting from her , God be praised ! " 

And the star was shining . 

Thus the child came to be an old man , and his once smooth face was
wrinkled , and his steps were slow and feeble , and his back was bent . 
And one night as he lay upon his bed , his children standing round , he
cried , as he had cried so long ago:

 " I see the star ! " 

They whispered one to another ,  " He is dying . " 

And he said ,  " I am . My age is falling from me like a garment , and I
move towards the star as a child . And O , my Father , now I thank Thee
that it has so often opened , to receive those dear ones who await me ! " 

And the star was shining , and it shines upon his grave . 


