I . --HOW THE KNIGHT CAME TO THE FISHERMAN ' S COTTAGE

Once--it may be some hundreds of years ago--there lived a good old
Fisherman , who , on a fine summer ' s evening , was sitting before the
door mending his nets . He dwelt in a land of exceeding beauty . The
green slope , upon which he had built his hut , stretched far out into a
great lake; and it seemed either that the cape , enamoured of the
glassy blue waters , had pressed forward into their bosom , or that the
lake had lovingly folded in its arms the blooming promontory , with her
waving grass and flowers , and the refreshing shade of her tall trees . 
Each bade the other welcome , and increased its own beauty by so doing . 
This lovely nook was scarcely ever visited by mankind , except by the
Fisherman and his family . For behind the promontory lay a very wild
forest , which , beside being gloomy and pathless , had too bad a name as
the resort of wondrous spirits and goblins , to be crossed by anyone
who could help it . Yet the pious old Fisherman went through it without
being molested , whenever he walked to a large city beyond the forest , 
to dispose of the costly fish that he caught in the lake . For him , 
indeed , there was little danger , even in that forest; for his thoughts
were almost all thoughts of devotion , and his custom was to carol
forth to Heaven a loud and heartfelt hymn , on first setting foot
within the treacherous shades . 

As he sat this evening most peacefully over his nets , he was startled
in an unwonted manner by a rustling sound in the forest , like that of
a man and horse; and the noise came nearer and nearer . The dreams he
had had in many a stormy night of the spirits of the forest started up
before his mind , particularly the image of a gigantic long snow-white
man , who kept nodding his head mysteriously . Nay , as he raised his
eyes and looked into the forest , he could fancy he saw , through the
thick screen of leaves , the nodding creature advance toward him . But
he soon composed himself , recollecting that even in the heart of the
woods nothing had ever befallen him; much less here , in the open air , 
could the bad spirits have power to touch him . He moreover repeated a
text from the Bible aloud and earnestly , which quite restored his
courage , and he almost laughed to see how his fancy had misled him . 
The white nodding man suddenly resolved himself into a little brook he
knew of old , which gushed bubbling out of the wood , and emptied itself
into the lake . And the rustling had been caused by a horseman in
gorgeous attire , who now came forward toward the hut from beneath the
trees . 

He wore a scarlet mantle over his purple , gold-embroidered jerkin; a
plume of red and purple feathers waved over his gold-coloured
barret-cap; and from his golden belt hung a glittering jewelled sword . 
The white courser which carried him was of lighter make than the
generality of chargers , and trod so airily , that the enamelled turf
seemed scarcely to bend under him . The aged Fisherman could not quite
shake off his uneasiness , although he told himself that so noble a
guest could bring him no harm , and accordingly doffed his hat
courteously , and interrupted his work when he approached . 

The Knight reined in his horse , and asked whether they could both
obtain one night ' s shelter . 

 " As to your horse , good sir , " answered the Fisherman ,  " I have no
better stable to offer him than the shady meadow , and no provender
but the grass which grows upon it . But you shall yourself be heartily
welcome to my poor house , and to the best of my supper and night
lodging . " 

The stranger seemed quite content; he dismounted , and they helped each
other to take off the horse ' s girth and saddle , after which the Knight
let him graze on the flowery pasture , saying to his host ,  " Even if I
had found you less kind and hospitable , my good old man , you must have
borne with me till to-morrow; for I see we are shut in by a wide lake
and Heaven forbid that I should cross the haunted forest again at
nightfall ! " 

 " We will not say much about that , " replied the Fisherman; and he led
his guest into the cottage . 

There , close by the hearth , from whence a scanty fire shed its
glimmering light over the clean little room , sat the Fisherman ' s old
wife . When their noble guest came in , she rose to give him a kind
welcome , but immediately resumed her place of honour , without offering
it to him; and the Fisherman said with a smile:  " Do not take it amiss , 
young sir , if she does not give up to you the most comfortable place;
it is the custom among us poor people that it should always belong to
the oldest . " 

 " Why , husband ! " said his wife , quietly ,  " what are you thinking of ? Our
guest is surely a Christian gentleman , and how could it come into his
kind young heart to turn old people out of their places ? Sit down , my
young lord , " added she , turning to the Knight;  " there stands a very
comfortable chair for you; only remember it must not be too roughly
handled , for one leg is not so steady as it has been . " The Knight drew
the chair carefully forward , seated himself sociably , and soon felt
quite at home in this little household , and as if he had just returned
to it from a far journey . 

The three friends began to converse openly and familiarly together . 
First the Knight asked a few questions about the forest , but the old
man would not say much of that; least of all , said he , was it fitting
to talk of such things at nightfall; but , on household concerns , and
their own way of life , the old folks talked readily; and were pleased
when the Knight told them of his travels , and that he had a castle
near the source of the Danube , and that his name was Lord Huldbrand of
Ringstetten . In the middle of their discourse , the stranger often
observed a noise outside a small window , as if someone were dashing
water against it . The old man knit his brows and looked grave whenever
this occurred; at last , when a great splash of water came full against
the panes , and some found its way into the room , he could bear it no
longer , but started up , crying ,  " Undine ! will you never leave off
these childish tricks--when we have a stranger gentleman in the house
too ! " This produced silence outside , all but a sound of suppressed
giggling , and the Fisherman said as he came back;  " My honoured guest , 
you must put up with this , and perhaps with many another piece of
mischief; but she means no harm . It is our adopted child Undine; there
is no breaking her of her childish ways , though she is eighteen years
old now . But as I told you she is as good a child as ever lived at
bottom . " 

 " Ay , so you may say ! " rejoined his wife , shaking her head .  " When you
come home from fishing , or from a journey , her playful nonsense may be
pleasant enough . But , to be keeping her out of mischief all day long , 
as I must do , and never get a word of sense from her , nor a bit of
help and comfort in my old age , is enough to weary the patience of a
saint . " 

 " Well , well , " said the good man ,  " you feel toward Undine as I do
toward the lake . Though its waves are apt enough to burst my banks
and my nets , yet I love them for all that , and so do you love our
pretty wench , with all her plaguey tricks . Don ' t you ? " 

 " Why , one cannot be really angry with her , to be sure , " said the dame , 
smiling . 

Here the door flew open , and a beautiful fair creature tripped in , and
said , playfully:  " Well , father , you made game of me; where is your
guest ? " The next moment she perceived the Knight , and stood fixed in
mute admiration; while Huldbrand gazed upon her lovely form , and tried
to impress her image on his mind , thinking that he must avail himself
of her amazement to do so , and that in a moment she would shrink away
in a fit of bashfulness . But it proved otherwise . After looking at him
a good while , she came up to him familiarly , knelt down beside him , 
and playing with a golden medal that hung from his rich chain , she
said:  " So , thou kind , thou beautiful guest ! hast thou found us out in
our poor hut at last ? Why didst thou roam the world so many years
without coming near us ? Art come through the wild forest , my handsome
friend ? " The old woman allowed him no time to answer . She desired her
to get up instantly , like a modest girl , and to set about her work . 
But Undine , without replying , fetched a footstool and put it close to
Huldbrand ' s chair , sat down there with her spinning , and said
cheerfully-- " I will sit and work here . " The old man behaved as parents
are apt to do with spoiled children . He pretended not to see Undine ' s
waywardness , and was beginning to talk of something else; but she
would not let him . She said ,  " I asked our visitor where he came from , 
and he has not answered me yet . " 

 " From the forest I came , you beautiful sprite , " answered Huldbrand;
and she continued:

 " Then you must tell me how you came there , and what wonderful
adventures you had in it , for I know that nobody can escape without
some . " 

Huldbrand could not help shuddering on being reminded of his
adventures , and involuntarily glanced at the window , half expecting to
see one of the strange beings he had encountered in the forest
grinning at him through it; but nothing was to be seen except the deep
black night , which had now closed in . He recollected himself , and was
just beginning his narrative , when the old man interposed:  " Not just
now , Sir Knight; this is no time for such tales . " 

But Undine jumped up passionately , put her beautiful arms akimbo , and
standing before the Fisherman , exclaimed:  " What ! may not he tell his
story , father--may not he ? But I will have it; he must . He shall
indeed ! " And she stamped angrily with her pretty feet , but it was all
done in so comical and graceful a manner , that Huldbrand thought her
still more bewitching in her wrath , than in her playful mood . 

Not so the old man; his long-restrained anger burst out uncontrolled . 
He scolded Undine smartly for her disobedience , and unmannerly conduct
to the stranger , his wife chiming in . 

Undine then said:  " Very well , if you will be quarrelsome and not let
me have my own way , you may sleep alone in your smoky old hut ! " and
she shot through the door like an arrow , and rushed into the dark
night . 


II . --HOW UNDINE FIRST CAME TO THE FISHERMAN

Huldbrand and the Fisherman sprang from their seats , and tried to
catch the angry maiden; but before they could reach the house door , 
Undine had vanished far into the thick shades , and not a sound of her
light footsteps was to be heard , by which to track her course . 
Huldbrand looked doubtfully at his host; he almost thought that the
whole fair vision which had so suddenly plunged into the night , must
be a continuation of the phantom play which had whirled around him in
his passage through the forest . But the old man mumbled through his
teeth:  " It is not the first time she has served us so . And here are
we , left in our anxiety with a sleepless night before us; for who can
tell what harm may befall her , all alone out-of-doors till daybreak ? " 

 " Then let us be after her , good father , for God ' s sake ! " cried
Huldbrand eagerly . 

The old man replied ,  " Where would be the use ? It were a sin to let you
set off alone in pursuit of the foolish girl , and my old legs would
never overtake such a Will-with-the-wisp--even if we could guess which
way she is gone . " 

 " At least let us call her , and beg her to come back , " said Huldbrand;
and he began calling after her in most moving tones:  " Undine ! O
Undine , do return ! " 

The old man shook his head , and said that all the shouting in the
world would do no good with such a wilful little thing . But yet he
could not himself help calling out from time to time in the darkness:
 " Undine ! ah , sweet Undine ! I entreat thee , come back this once . " 

The Fisherman ' s words proved true . Nothing was to be seen or heard of
Undine; and as her foster-father would by no means suffer Huldbrand to
pursue her , they had nothing for it but to go in again . They found the
fire on the hearth nearly burnt out , and the dame , who did not take to
heart Undine ' s flight and danger so much as her husband , was gone to
bed . The old man blew the coals , laid on dry wood , and by the light of
the reviving flames he found a flagon of wine , which he put between
himself and his guest .  " You are uneasy about that silly wench , Sir
Knight , " said he ,  " and we had better kill part of the night chatting
and drinking , than toss about in our beds , trying to sleep in vain . 
Had not we ? " 

Huldbrand agreed; the Fisherman made him sit in his wife ' s empty
arm-chair , and they both drank and talked together , as a couple of
worthy friends should do . Whenever , indeed , there was the least stir
outside the window , or even sometimes without any , one of them would
look up and say ,  " There she comes . " Then they would keep silence for a
few moments , and as nothing came , resume their conversation , with a
shake of the head and a sigh . 

But as neither could think of much beside Undine , the best means they
could devise for beguiling the time was , that the Fisherman should
relate , and the Knight listen to , the history of her first coming to
the cottage . He began as follows:

 " One day , some fifteen years ago , I was carrying my fish through that
dreary wood to the town . My wife stayed at home , as usual; and at that
time she had a good and pretty reason for it--the Lord had bestowed
upon us  ( old as we already were ) a lovely babe . It was a girl; and so
anxious were we to do our best for the little treasure , that we began
to talk of leaving our beautiful home , in order to give our darling a
good education among other human beings . With us poor folks , wishing
is one thing , and doing is quite another , Sir Knight; but what then ? 
we can only try our best . Well then , as I plodded on , I turned over
the scheme in my head . I was loath to leave our own dear nook , and it
made me shudder to think , in the din and brawls of the town ,  ' So it is
here we shall soon live , or in some place nearly as bad ! ' Yet I never
murmured against our good God , but rather thanked Him in secret for
His last blessing; nor can I say that I met with anything
extraordinary in the forest , either coming or going; indeed nothing to
frighten me has ever crossed my path . The Lord was ever with me in the
awful shades . " 

Here he uncovered his bald head , and sat for a time in silent prayer;
then putting his cap on again , he continued:  " On this side of the wood
it was--on this side , that the sad news met me . My wife came toward me
with eyes streaming like two fountains; she was in deep mourning .  ' Oh , 
good Heaven ! ' I called out ,  ' where is our dear child ? Tell me ? ' 

 " ' Gone , dear husband , ' she replied; and we went into our cottage
together , weeping silently . I looked for the little corpse , and then
first heard how it had happened . My wife had been sitting on the shore
with the child , and playing with it , all peace and happiness; when the
babe all at once leaned over , as if she saw something most beautiful
in the water; there she sat smiling , sweet angel ! and stretching out
her little hands; but the next moment she darted suddenly out of her
arms , and down into the smooth waters . I made much search for the poor
little corpse; but in vain; not a trace of her could I find . 

 " When evening was come , we childless parents were sitting together in
the hut , silent; neither of us had a mind to speak , even if the tears
had let us . We were looking idly into the fire . Just then something
made a noise at the door . It opened , and a beautiful little maid , of
three or four years ' old stood there gaily dressed , and smiling in our
faces . We were struck dumb with surprise , and at first hardly knew if
she were a little human being , or only an empty shadow . But I soon saw
that her golden hair and gay clothes were dripping wet , and it struck
me the little fairy must have been in the water and distressed for
help .  ' Wife , ' said I ,  ' our dear child had no friend to save her; shall
we not do for others what would have made our remaining days so happy , 
if anyone had done it for us ? ' We undressed the child , put her to bed , 
and gave her a warm drink , while she never said a word , but kept
smiling at us with her sky-blue eyes . 

 " The next morning we found she had done herself no harm; and I asked
her who were her parents , and what had brought her here; but she gave
me a strange , confused answer . I am sure she must have been born far
away , for these fifteen years have we kept her , without ever finding
out where she came from; and besides , she is apt to let drop such
marvellous things in her talk , that you might think she had lived in
the moon . She will speak of golden castles , of crystal roofs , and I
can ' t tell what beside . The only thing she has told us clearly , is , 
that as she was sailing on the lake with her mother , she fell into the
water , and when she recovered her senses found herself lying under
these trees , in safety and comfort , upon our pretty shore . 

 " So now we had a serious , anxious charge thrown upon us . To keep
and bring up the foundling , instead of our poor drowned child--that
was soon resolved upon but who should tell us if she had yet been
baptised or no ? She knew how not how to answer the question . That she
was one of God ' s creatures , made for His glory and service , that much
she knew; and anything that would glorify and please Him , she was
willing to have done . So my wife and I said to each other:  ' If she has
never been baptised , there is no doubt it should be done; and if she
was , better do too much than too little , in a matter of such
consequence . ' We therefore began to seek a good name for the child . 
Dorothea seemed to us the best; for I had once heard that meant God ' s
gift; and she had indeed been sent us by Him as a special blessing , to
comfort us in our misery . But she would not hear of that name . She
said Undine was what her parents used to call her , and Undine she
would still be . That , I thought , sounded like a heathen name , and
occurred in no Calendar; and I took counsel with a priest in the town
about it . He also objected to the name Undine; and at my earnest
request , came home with me , through the dark forest , in order to
baptise her . The little creature stood before us , looking so gay and
charming in her holiday clothes , that the priest ' s heart warmed toward
her; and what with coaxing and wilfulness , she got the better of him , 
so that he clean forgot all the objections he had thought of to the
name Undine . She was therefore so christened and behaved particularly
well and decently during the sacred rite , wild and unruly as she had
always been before . For , what my wife said just now was too true--we
have indeed found her the wildest little fairy ! If I were to tell you
all-- " 

Here the Knight interrupted the Fisherman , to call his attention to a
sound of roaring waters , which he had noticed already in the pauses of
the old man ' s speech , and which now rose in fury as it rushed past the
windows . They both ran to the door . By the light of the newly risen
moon , they saw the brook which gushed out of the forest breaking
wildly over its banks , and whirling along stones and branches in its
eddying course . A storm , as if awakened by the uproar , burst from the
heavy clouds that were chasing each other across the moon; the lake
howled under the wings of the wind; the trees on the shore groaned
from top to bottom , and bowed themselves over the rushing waters . 
 " Undine ! for God ' s sake , Undine ! " cried the Knight , and the old man . 
No answer was to be heard; and , heedless now of any danger to
themselves , they ran off in different directions , calling her in
frantic anxiety . 


III . --HOW THEY FOUND UNDINE AGAIN

The longer Huldbrand wandered in vain pursuit of Undine , the more
bewildered he became . The idea that she might be a mere spirit of the
woods , sometimes returned upon him with double force; nay , amid the
howling waves and storm , the groaning of trees , and the wild commotion
of the once-peaceful spot , he might have fancied the whole promontory , 
its hut and its inhabitants , to be a delusion of magic , but that he
still heard in the distance the Fisherman ' s piteous cries of  " Undine ! " 
and the old housewife ' s loud prayers and hymns , above the whistling of
the blast . 

At last he found himself on the margin of the overflowing stream , and
saw it by the moonlight rushing violently along , close to the edge of
the mysterious forest so as to make an island of the peninsula on
which he stood .  " Gracious Heaven ! " thought he ,  " Undine may have
ventured a step or two into that awful forest--perhaps in her pretty
waywardness , just because I would not tell her my story--and the
swollen stream has cut her off , and left her weeping alone among the
spectres ! " A cry of terror escaped him , and he clambered down the bank
by means of some stones and fallen trees , hoping to wade or swim
across the flood , and seek the fugitive beyond it . Fearful and
unearthly visions did indeed float before him , like those he had met
with in the morning , beneath these groaning , tossing branches . 
Especially he was haunted by the appearance of a tall white man , whom
he remembered but too well , grinning and nodding at him from the
opposite bank; however , the thought of these grim monsters did but
urge him onward as he recollected Undine , now perhaps in deadly fear
among them , and alone . 

He had laid hold of a stout pine branch , and leaning on it , was
standing in the eddy , though scarcely able to stem it , but he stepped
boldly forward--when a sweet voice exclaimed close behind him:  " Trust
him not--trust not ! The old fellow is tricksy--the stream ! " 

Well he knew those silver tones: the moon was just disappearing behind
a cloud , and he stood amid the deepening shades , made dizzy as the
water shot by him with the speed of an arrow . Yet he would not desist . 
 " And if thou art not truly there , if thou flittest before me an empty
shadow , I care not to live; I will melt into air like thee , my beloved
Undine ! " This he cried aloud , and strode further into the flood . 

 " Look round then--look round , fair youth ! " he heard just behind him , 
and looking round , he beheld by the returning moonbeams , on a fair
island left by the flood , under some thickly interlaced branches , 
Undine all smiles and loveliness , nestling in the flowery grass . How
much more joyfully than before did the young man use his pine staff to
cross the waters ! A few strides brought him through the flood that had
parted them; and he found himself at her side , on the nook of soft
grass , securely sheltered under the shade of the old trees . Undine
half arose , and twined her arms round his neck in the green arbour , 
making him sit down by her on the turf .  " Here you shall tell me all , 
my own friend , " said she in a low whisper;  " the cross old folks cannot
overhear us . And our pretty bower of leaves is well worth their
wretched hut . " 

 " This is heaven ! " cried Huldbrand , as he clasped in his arms the
beautiful flatterer . 

Meantime the old man had reached the banks of the stream , and he
called out:  " So , Sir Knight , when I had made you welcome , as one
honest man should another , here are you making love to my adopted
child--to say nothing of your leaving me to seek her , alone and
terrified , all night . " 

 " I have but this moment found her , old man ! " cried the Knight in
reply . 

 " Well , I am glad of that , " said the Fisherman;  " now then bring her
back to me at once . " 

But Undine would not hear of it . She had rather she said , go quite
away into the wild woods with the handsome stranger , than return to
the hut , where she had never had her own way , and which the Knight
must sooner or later leave . Embracing Huldbrand , she sang with
peculiar charm and grace:

 " From misty cave the mountain wave
 Leapt out and sought the main ! 
The Ocean ' s foam she made her home , 
 And ne ' er returned again . " 

The old man wept bitterly as she sang , but this did not seem to move
her . She continued to caress her lover , till at length he said:
 " Undine , the poor old man ' s grief goes to my heart if not to yours . 
Let us go back to him . " 

Astonished , she raised her large blue eyes toward him , and after a
pause answered slowly and reluctantly:  " To please you , I will:
whatever you like pleases me too . But the old man yonder must first
promise me that he will let you tell me all you saw in the forest , and
the rest we shall see about . " 

 " Only come back--do come ! " cried the Fisherman , and not another word
could he say . At the same moment he stretched his arms over the stream
toward her , and nodded his head by way of giving her the desired
promise; and as his white hair fell over his face , it gave him a
strange look , and reminded Huldbrand involuntarily of the nodding
white man in the woods . Determined , however , that nothing should stop
him , the young Knight took the fair damsel in his arms , and carried
her through the short space of foaming flood , which divided the island
from the mainland . The old man fell upon Undine ' s neck , and rejoiced , 
and kissed her in the fulness of his heart; his aged wife also came
up , and welcomed their recovered child most warmly . All reproaches
were forgotten; the more so , as Undine seemed to have left her
sauciness behind , and overwhelmed her foster parents with kind words
and caresses . 

When these transports of joy had subsided , and they began to look
about them , the rosy dawn was just shedding its glow over the lake , 
the storm had ceased , and the birds were singing merrily on the wet
branches . As Undine insisted upon hearing the story of the Knight ' s
adventure , both the old folks cheerfully indulged her . Breakfast was
set out under the trees between the cottage and the lake , and they sat
down before it with glad hearts , Undine placing herself resolutely on
the grass at the Knight ' s feet . Huldbrand began his narrative as
follows . 


IV . --OF WHAT HAD BEFALLEN THE KNIGHT IN THE FOREST

 " About eight days ago , I rode into the imperial city beyond this
forest . A grand tournament and tilting was held there , and I spared
neither lance nor steed . As I stood still a moment to rest myself , in
a pause of the noble game , and had just given my helmet in charge to a
squire , my eye fell upon a most beautiful woman , who stood , richly
adorned , in one of the galleries , looking on . I inquired her name , 
and found that this charming lady was Bertalda , the adopted daughter
of one of the principal lords in the neighbourhood . I observed that
her eye was upon me too , and as is the way with us young knights , I
had not been slack before , but I now fought more bravely still . That
evening I was Bertalda ' s partner in the dance , and so I was again
every evening during the jousting . " 

Here a sudden pain in his left hand , which hung beside him , checked
the Knight in his tale , and he looked at his hand . Undine ' s pearly
teeth had bitten one of his fingers sharply , and she looked very black
at him . But the next moment that look changed into an expression of
tender sadness , and she whispered low:  " So you are faithless too ! " 
Then she hid her face in her hands , and the Knight proceeded with his
tale , although staggered and perplexed . 

 " That Bertalda is a high-spirited , extraordinary maid . On the second
day she charmed me far less than the first , and on the third , less
still . But I remained with her , because she was more gracious to me
than to any other knight , and so it fell out that I asked her in jest
for one of her gloves .  ' You shall have it , ' said she ,  ' if you will
visit the haunted forest alone , and bring me an account of it . ' It was
not that I cared much for her glove , but the words had been spoken , 
and a knight that loves his fame does not wait to be twice urged to
such a feat . " 

 " I thought she had loved you , " interrupted Undine . 

 " It looked like it , " he replied . 

 " Well , " cried the maiden , laughing ,  " she must be a fool indeed ! To
drive _him_ away whom she loves ! and into a haunted forest besides ! 
The forest and its mysteries might have waited long enough , for me . " 

 " I set out yesterday morning , " continued the Knight , smiling kindly at
Undine .  " The stems of the trees looked so bright in the morning
sunshine , as it played upon the green turf , and the leaves whispered
together so pleasantly , that I could not but laugh at those who
imagined any evil to lurk in such a beautiful place . I shall very soon
have ridden through it and back again , thought I , pushing on cheerily , 
and before I was aware of it , I found myself in the depths of its
leafy shades , and the plains behind me far out of sight . It then
occurred to me that I was likely enough to lose my way in this
wilderness of trees , and that this might be the only real danger to
which the traveller was here exposed . So I halted , and took notice of
the course of the sun; it was now high in the heavens . 

 " On looking up , I saw something black among the boughs of a tall oak . 
I took it for a bear , and seized my rifle; but it addressed me in a
human voice , most hoarse and grating , saying:  ' If I did not break off
the twigs up here , what should we do to-night for fuel to roast you
with , Sir Simpleton ? ' And he gnashed his teeth , and rattled the
boughs , so as to startle my horse , which ran away with me before I
could make out what kind of a devil it was . " 

 " You should not mention _his_ name , " said the Fisherman , crossing
himself; his wife silently did the same , while Undine turned her
beaming eyes upon her lover , and said--

 " He is safe now; it is well they did not really roast him . Go on , 
pretty youth . " 

He continued:  " My terrified horse had almost dashed me against many a
trunk and branch; he was running down with fright and heat , and yet
there was no stopping him . At length he rushed madly toward the brink
of a stony precipice; but here , as it seemed to me , a tall white man
threw himself across the plunging animal ' s path , and made him start
back , and stop . I then recovered the control of him , and found that , 
instead of a white man , my preserver was no other than a bright
silvery brook , which gushed down from the hill beside me , checking and
crossing my horse in his course . " 

 " Thanks , dear brook ! " cried Undine , clapping her hands . But the old
man shook his head , and seemed lost in thought . 

 " Scarcely had I settled myself in the saddle , and got firm hold of my
reins again , " proceeded Huldbrand ,  " when an extraordinary little man
sprang up beside me , wizen and hideous beyond measure; he was of a
yellow-brown hue , and his nose almost as big as the whole of his body . 
He grinned at me in the most fulsome way with his wide mouth , bowing
and scraping every moment . As I could not abide these antics , I
thanked him abruptly , pulled my still-trembling horse another way , and
thought I would seek some other adventure , or perhaps go home; for
during my wild gallop the sun had passed his meridian , and was now
declining westward . But the little imp sprang round like lightning , 
and stood in front of my horse again . 

 " ' Make way ! ' cried I impatiently ,  ' the animal is unruly , and may run
over you . ' 

 " ' Oh , ' snarled the imp , with a laugh more disgusting than before , 
 ' first give me a piece of coin for having caught your horse so nicely;
but for me , you and your pretty beast would be lying in the pit down
yonder: whew ! ' 

 " ' Only have done with your grimaces , ' said I ,  ' and take your money
along with you , though it is all a lie: look there , it was that honest
brook that saved me , not you--you pitiful wretch ! ' So saying , I
dropped a gold coin into his comical cap , which he held out toward me
like a beggar . 

 " I trotted on , but he still followed , screaming , and , with
inconceivable rapidity , whisked up to my side . I put my horse into a
gallop; he kept pace with me , though with much difficulty , and twisted
his body into various frightful and ridiculous attitudes , crying at
each step as he held up the money:  ' Bad coin ! bad gold ! bad gold ! bad
coin ! ' And this he shrieked in such a ghastly tone , that you would
have expected him to drop down dead after each cry . 

 " At last I stopped , much vexed , and asked ,  ' What do you want , with
your shrieks ? Take another gold coin; take two if you will , only let
me alone . ' 

 " He began his odious smirking again , and snarled ,  ' It ' s not gold , it ' s
not gold that I want , young gentleman; I have rather more of that than
I can use: you shall see . ' 

 " All at once the surface of the ground became transparent; it looked
like a smooth globe of green glass , and within it I saw a crowd of
goblins at play with silver and gold . Tumbling about , head over heels
they pelted each other in sport , making a toy of the precious metals , 
and powdering their faces with gold dust . My ugly companion stood half
above , half below the surface; he made the others reach up to him
quantities of gold , and showed it to me laughing , and then flung it
into the fathomless depths beneath . He displayed the piece of gold I
had given him to the goblins below , who held their sides with laughing
and hissed at me in scorn . At length all their bony fingers pointed at
me together; and louder and louder , closer and closer , wilder and
wilder grew the turmoil , as it rose toward me , till not my horse only , 
but I myself was terrified; I put spurs into him , and cannot tell how
long I may have scoured the forest this time . 

 " When at last I halted , the shades of evening had closed in . Through
the branches I saw a white footpath gleaming and hoped it must be a
road out of the forest to the town . I resolved to work my way thither;
but lo ! an indistinct , dead-white face , with ever-changing features , 
peeped at me through the leaves; I tried to avoid it , but wherever I
went , there it was . Provoked , I attempted to push my horse against
it; then it splashed us both over with white foam , and we turned away , 
blinded for the moment . So it drove us , step by step , further and
further from the footpath , and indeed never letting us go on
undisturbed but in one direction . While we kept to this , it was close
upon our heels , but did not thwart us . Having looked round once or
twice , I observed that the white foaming head was placed on a gigantic
body , equally white . I sometimes doubted my first impression , and
thought it merely a waterfall , but I never could satisfy myself that
it was so . Wearily did my horse and I precede this active white
pursuer , who often nodded at us , as if saying ,  ' That ' s right ! that ' s
right ! ' and it ended by our issuing from the wood here , where I
rejoiced to see your lawn , the lake , and this cottage , and where the
long white man vanished . " 

 " Thank Heaven , he is gone , " said the old man , and he then proceeded to
consider how his guest could best return to his friends in the city . 
Upon this , Undine was heard to laugh in a whisper . 

Huldbrand observed it , and said:  " I thought you had wished me to stay;
and now you seem pleased when we talk of my going ? " 

 " Because , " replied Undine ,  " you cannot get away . Only try to cross the
swollen brook , in a boat , on horseback , or on foot . Or rather , do not
try , for you would be dashed to pieces by the branches and stones that
it hurls along . And as to the lake , I know how that is: father never
ventures across it in his boat . " 

Huldbrand laughed , and got up to see whether she had spoken true; the
old man went with him , and the maiden tripped along playfully by their
side . They found she had told them no worse than the truth and the
Knight resigned himself to staying in the island , as it might now be
called till the floods had subsided . As they returned homeward , he
whispered in his pretty companion ' s ear-- " Well , my little Undine ! are
you angry at my staying ? " 

 " Ah , " said she sullenly ,  " never mind . If I had not bitten you , who
knows what might have come out in your story of Bertalda ? " 


V . --OF THE LIFE WHICH THE KNIGHT LED ON THE ISLAND

Has it ever befallen thee , gentle reader , after many ups and downs in
this troublesome world , to alight upon a spot where thou foundest
rest; where the love which is born with us for fireside comfort and
domestic peace , revived in thee; where thou couldst fancy thy early
home with the blossoms of childhood , its pure , heartfelt affection , 
and the holy influence breathed from thy fathers ' graves , to be
restored to thee--and that it must indeed be  " good for thee to be
here , and to build tabernacles ? " The charm may have been broken , the
dream dispelled; but that has nothing to do with our present picture;
nor wilt thou care to dwell on such bitter moments; but recall to mind
that period of unspeakable peace , that foretaste of angelic rest which
was granted thee , and thou wilt partly conceive what the Knight
Huldbrand felt , while he lived on the promontory . Often , with secret
satisfaction , did he mark the forest stream rolling by more wildly
every day; its bed became wider and wider , and he felt the period of
his seclusion from the world must be still prolonged . Having found an
old crossbow in a corner of the cottage , and mended it , he spent part
of his days roving about , waylaying the birds that flew by , and
bringing whatever he killed to the kitchen , as rare game . When he came
back laden with spoil , Undine would often scold him for taking the
life of the dear little joyous creatures , soaring in the blue depths
of Heaven; she would even weep bitterly over the dead birds . But if he
came home empty-handed , she found fault with his awkwardness and
laziness , which obliged them to be content with fish and crabs for
dinner . Either way , he took delight in her pretty fits of anger; the
more so as she rarely failed to make up for them by the fondest
caresses afterwards . The old folks , having been in the young people ' s
confidence from the first , unconsciously looked upon them as a
betrothed or even married pair , shut out from the world with them in
this retreat , and bestowed upon them for comforts in their old age . 
And this very seclusion helped to make the young Knight feel as if he
were already Undine ' s bridegroom . It seemed to him that the whole
world was contained within the surrounding waters , or at any rate , 
that he could never more cross that charmed boundary , and rejoin other
human beings . And if at times the neighing of his steed reminded him
of former feats of chivalry , and seemed to ask for more; if his coat
of arms , embroidered on the saddle and trappings , caught his eye; or
if his good sword fell from the nail on which he had hung it and
slipped out of its scabbard , he would silence the misgivings that
arose , by thinking , Undine is not a fisherman ' s daughter , but most
likely sprung from some highly noble family in distant lands . The only
thing that ever ruffled him , was to hear the old woman scolding
Undine . The wayward girl only laughed at her; but to him it seemed as
if his own honour were touched; and yet he could not blame the good
wife , for Undine mostly deserved ten times worse than she got , 
therefore he still felt kindly toward the old dame , and these little
rubs scarcely disturbed the even current of their lives . 

At length , however , a grievance did arise . The Knight and the
Fisherman were in the habit of sitting cheerfully over a flask of
wine , both at noon , and also at eventide while the wind whistled
around , as it generally did at night . But they had now exhausted the
whole stock which the Fisherman had , long since , brought from the town
with him and they both missed it sadly . Undine laughed at them all day
for it , but they could not join in her mirth as heartily as usual . 
Toward evening she left the cottage , saying she could no longer bear
such long dismal faces . As the twilight looked stormy , and the waters
were beginning to moan and heave , the Knight and the old man ran out
anxiously to fetch her back , remembering the agony of that night when
Huldbrand first came to the cottage . But they were met by Undine , 
clapping her hands merrily .  " What will you give me if I get you some
wine ? But , indeed , I want no reward for it , " she added;  " I shall be
satisfied if you will but look brighter , and find more to say than you
have done all these tedious mornings . Come along; the floods have
washed a barrel ashore , and I will engage to sleep a whole week
through if it is not a barrel of wine ! " 

The men both followed her to a shady creek , and there found a barrel , 
which did look as if it contained the generous liquor which they
longed for . They rolled it toward the hut as fast as they could , for a
heavy storm seemed stalking across the sky , and there was light enough
left to show them the waves of the lake tossing up their foaming
heads , as if looking out for the rain which would soon pour down upon
them . Undine lent a hand in the work , and presently , when the shower
threatened to break instantly over their heads , she spoke to the big
clouds in playful defiance:  " You , you there ! mind you do not give us a
drenching; we are some way from home yet . " The old man admonished her
that this was sinful presumption , but she laughed slyly to herself , 
and no harm came of it . Beyond their hopes , they all three reached the
comfortable fireside with their prize , unhurt; and it was not till
they had opened the barrel , and found it to contain excellent wine , 
that the rain broke from the heavy clouds in torrents , and they heard
the storm roaring among the trees , and over the lake ' s heaving
billows . 

A few bottles were soon filled from the great barrel , enough to last
them several days; and they sat sipping and chatting over the bright
fire , secure from the raging tempest . But the old man ' s heart
presently smote him .  " Dear me , " said he ,  " here are we making merry
over the blessing of Providence , while the owner of it has perhaps
been carried away by the flood , and lost his life ! " -- " No , that he has
not , " said Undine , smiling; and she filled the Knight ' s glass again . 
He replied ,  " I give you my word , good father , that if I knew how to
find and save him , no danger should deter me; I would not shrink from
setting out in this darkness . This much I promise you , if ever I set
foot in an inhabited country again , I will make inquiry after him or
his heirs , and restore to them twice or three times the value of the
wine . " This pleased the old man , he gave an approving nod to the
Knight , and drained his glass with a better conscience and a lighter
heart . But Undine said to Huldbrand ,  " Do as you like with your money , 
you may make what compensation you please; but as to setting out and
wandering after him , that was hastily said . I should cry my heart out
if we chanced to lose you; and had not you rather stay with me and
with the good wine ? "  " Why , yes ! " said Huldbrand , laughing .  " Well
then , " rejoined Undine ,  " it was a foolish thing you talked of doing;
charity begins at home , you know . " The old woman turned away , shaking
her head and sighing; her husband forgot his usual indulgence for the
pretty lassie , and reproved her sharply .  " One would think , " said he , 
 " you had been reared by Turks and heathens; God forgive you and us , 
you perverse child . " -- " Ay but it _is_ my way of thinking , " pursued
Undine ,  " whoever has reared me , so what is the use of your
talking ? " -- " Peace ! " cried the Fisherman; and she , who with all her
wildness was sometimes cowed in a moment , clung trembling to
Huldbrand , and whispered ,  " And are you angry with me , dear friend ? " 
The Knight pressed her soft hand , and stroked down her ringlets . Not a
word could he say; his distress at the old man ' s harshness toward
Undine had sealed his lips; and so each couple remained sitting
opposite the other , in moody silence and constraint . 


VI . --OF A BRIDAL

A gentle tap at the door broke the silence , and made them all start:
it sometimes happens that a mere trifle , coming quite unexpectedly , 
strikes the senses with terror . They looked at each other hesitating;
the tap was repeated , accompanied by a deep groan , and the Knight
grasped his sword . But the old man muttered ,  " If it is what I fear , it
is not a sword that will help us ! " Undine , however , stepped forward to
the door , and said boldly and sharply ,  " If you are after any mischief , 
you spirits of earth , Kühleborn shall teach you manners . " 

The terror of the others increased at these strange words; they looked
at the maiden with awe , and Huldbrand was just mustering courage to
ask her a question , when a voice answered her from without:  " I am no
spirit of earth; call me , if you will , a spirit pent in mortal clay . 
If you fear God , and will be charitable , you dwellers in the cottage , 
open the door to me . " Undine opened it before he had done speaking , 
and held out a lamp into the stormy night , so as to show them the
figure of an aged Priest , who started back as the radiant beauty of
Undine flashed upon his sight . Well might he suspect magic and
witchery , when so bright a vision shone out of a mean-looking cottage;
he accordingly began a canticle ,  " All good spirits give praise to the
Lord ! " 

 " I am no ghost , " said Undine , smiling;  " am I so frightful to behold ? 
And you may see that a pious saying has no terrors for me . I worship
God , too , and praise Him after my own fashion; He has not created us
all alike . Come in , venerable father; you will find worthy folks
here . " 

The holy man walked in , bowing and casting his eyes around , and
looking most mild and venerable . Every fold of his dark garment was
dripping with water , and so were his long white beard and hoary locks . 
The Fisherman and the Knight led him to a bedroom , and gave him change
of clothing , while the women dried his wet garments by the hearth
fire . The aged stranger thanked them with all humility and gentleness , 
but would by no means accept of the Knight ' s splendid mantle , which he
offered him; he chose himself an old gray wrapper of the Fisherman ' s
instead . So they returned to the kitchen; the dame up gave her own
arm-chair to the Priest , and had no peace till he sat himself down on
it:  " For , " said she ,  " you are old and weary , and a priest besides . " 
Undine pushed her little footstool toward the good man ' s feet , and
altogether behaved to him quite properly and gracefully . Huldbrand
took notice of this , in a playful whisper; but she answered very
gravely:  " Because he is a servant of the Maker of us all; that is too
serious for a jest . " 

Meantime the two men set meat and wine before their guest , and when he
had recruited his strength a little , he began his story; saying that
the day before he had left his monastery , which was a good way off
beyond the lake , intending to visit the bishop at his palace , and
report to him the distress which these almost supernatural floods had
caused the monks and their poor tenantry . After going round a long
way , to avoid these floods , he had been obliged toward evening to
cross an arm of the overflowing lake , with the help of two honest
sailors .  " But , " added he ,  " no sooner had our little vessel touched the
waves , than we were wrapped in the tremendous storm , which is still
raging over our heads now . It looked as if the waters had only awaited
our coming to give a loose to their fury . The oars were soon dashed
from the seamen ' s hands , and we saw their broken fragments carried
further and further from us by the waves . We floated on the wave tops , 
helpless , driven by the furious tempest toward your shores , which we
saw in the distance whenever the clouds parted for a moment . The boat
was tossed about still more wildly and giddily: and whether it upset , 
or I fell out , I cannot tell . I floated on , till a wave landed me at
the foot of a tree , in this your island . " 

 " Ay , island indeed ! " said the Fisherman .  " It was a promontory but a
short time ago . But , since the stream and our lake are gone raving mad
together , everything about us is new and strange . " 

The Priest continued:  " As I crept along the water-side in the dark , 
with a wild uproar around me , something caught my eye , and presently I
descried a beaten pathway , which was soon lost in the shades; I spied
the light in your cottage , and ventured to come hither; and I cannot
sufficiently thank my heavenly Father , who has not only delivered me
from the waters , but guided me to such kind souls . I feel this
blessing the more , as it is very likely I may never see any faces but
yours again . " -- " How so ? " asked the fisherman .  " Can you guess how long
this fury of the elements may last ? " replied the Priest .  " And I am an
old man . My stream of life may perhaps lose itself in the earth , 
before these floods subside . And besides , it may be the foaming waters
will divide you from the forest more and more , till you are unable to
get across in your fishing boat; and the people of the mainland , full
of their own concerns , would quite forget you in your retreat . " 

Shuddering , and crossing herself , the Fisherman ' s wife exclaimed ,  " God
forbid ! " But the old man smiled at her , and said ,  " What creatures we
are . That would make no difference , to you at least , my dear wife . How
many years is it since you have set foot within the forest ? And have
you seen any face but Undine ' s and mine ? Lately , indeed , we have had
the good Knight and Priest besides . But they would stay with us; so
that if we are forgotten in this island , you will be the gainer . " 

 " So I see , " said the dame;  " yet somehow , it is cheerless to feel
ourselves quite cut off from the rest of the world , however seldom we
had seen it before . " 

 " Then _you_ will stay with us ! " murmured Undine in a sweet voice , and
she pressed closer to Huldbrand ' s side . But he was lost in deep
thought . Since the Priest had last spoken , the land beyond the wild
stream had seemed to his fancy more dark and distant than ever; while
the flowery island he lived in--and his bride , the fairest flower in
the picture--bloomed and smiled more and more freshly in his
imagination . Here was the Priest at hand to unite them;--and , to
complete his resolution , the old dame just then darted a reproving
look at Undine , for clinging to her lover ' s side in the holy man ' s
presence; an angry lecture seemed on the point of beginning . He turned
toward the Priest , and these words burst from him:  " You see before
you a betrothed pair , reverend sir; if this damsel and the kind old
people will consent , you shall unite us this very evening . " 

The old folks were much surprised . Such a thought had often crossed
their minds , but they had never till this moment heard it uttered; and
it now fell upon their ears like an unexpected thing . Undine had
suddenly become quite grave , and sat musing deeply , while the Priest
inquired into various circumstances , and asked the old couple ' s
consent to the deed . After some deliberation , they gave it; the dame
went away to prepare the young people ' s bridal chamber , and to fetch
from her stores two consecrated tapers for the wedding ceremony . 
Meanwhile the Knight was pulling two rings off his gold chain for
himself and his bride to exchange . But this roused Undine from her
reverie , and she said:  " Stay ! my parents did not send me into the
world quite penniless; they looked forward long ago to this occasion
and provided for it . " She quickly withdrew , and returned bringing two
costly rings , one of which she gave to her betrothed and kept the
other herself . This astonished the old Fisherman , and still more his
wife , who came in soon after; for they neither of them had ever seen
these jewels about the child .  " My parents , " said Undine ,  " had these
rings sewed into the gay dress which I wore , when first I came to you . 
They charged me to let no one know of them till my wedding-day came . 
Therefore I took them secretly out of the dress , and have kept them
hidden till this evening . " 

Here the Priest put a stop to the conversation , by lighting the holy
tapers , placing them on the table , and calling the young pair to him . 
With few and solemn words he joined their hands; the aged couple gave
their blessing , while the bride leaned upon her husband , pensive and
trembling . 

When it was over , the Priest said:  " You are strange people after all ! 
What did you mean by saying you were the only inhabitants of this
island ? During the whole ceremony there was a fine-looking tall man , 
in a white cloak , standing just outside the window opposite me . He
must be near the door still , if you like to invite him in . " -- " Heaven
forbid ! " said the dame shuddering; the old man shook his head without
speaking; and Huldbrand rushed to the window . He could fancy he saw a
streak of white , but it was soon lost in darkness . So he assured the
Priest he must have been mistaken; and they all sat down comfortably
round the fire . 


VII . --HOW THE REST OF THE EVENING PASSED AWAY

Undine had been perfectly quiet and well-behaved both before and
during the marriage ceremony; but now her wild spirits seemed the more
uncontrollable from the restraint they had undergone , and rose to an
extravagant height . She played all manner of childish tricks on her
husband , her foster parents , and even the venerable Priest , and when
the old woman began to check her , one or two words from Huldbrand , who
gravely called Undine  " his wife , " reduced her to silence . The Knight
himself , however , was far from being pleased at Undine ' s childishness;
but no hint or sign would stop her . Whenever she perceived his
disapproving looks--which she occasionally did--it subdued her for the
moment; she would sit down by him , whisper something playfully in his
ear , and so dispel the frown as it gathered on his brow . But the next
instant some wild nonsense would dart into her head , and set her off
worse than ever . At last the Priest said to her , in a kind but grave
manner ,  " My dear young lady , no one that beholds you can be severe
upon you , it is true; but remember , it is your duty to keep watch over
your soul , that it may be ever in harmony with that of your wedded
husband . "  " Soul ! " cried Undine , laughing;  " that sounds very fine , and
for most people may be very edifying and moral advice . But if one has
no soul at all , pray how is one to keep watch over it ? And that is my
case . " The Priest was deeply hurt , and turned away his face in mingled
sorrow and anger . But she came up to him beseechingly , and said ,  " Nay , 
hear me before you are angry , for it grieves me to see you displeased , 
and you would not distress any creature who has done you no harm . Only
have patience with me , and I will tell you all , from the beginning . " 

They saw she was preparing to give them a regular history; but she
stopped short , appearing thrilled by some secret recollection , and
burst into a flood of gentle tears . They were quite at a loss what to
think of her , and gazed upon her , distressed from various causes . At
length drying her eyes , she looked at the Priest earnestly and said , 
 " There must be much to love in a soul , but much that is awful too . For
God ' s sake , holy father , tell me--were it not better to be still
without one ? " She waited breathlessly for an answer , restraining her
tears . Her hearers had all risen from their seats , and now stepped
back from her , shuddering . She seemed to have no eyes but for the
saintly man; her countenance assumed an expression of anxiety and awe
which yet more alarmed the others .  " Heavy must be the burden of a
soul , " added she , as no one answered her-- " heavy indeed ! for the mere
approach of mine over-shadows me with anxious melancholy . And ah ! how
light-hearted , how joyous I used to be ! " A fresh burst of weeping
overcame her , and she covered her face with her veil . 

The Priest then approached her with much gravity , and adjured her by
the holiest names to confess the truth , if any evil lurked in her , 
unknown to them . But she fell on her knees before him , repeated after
him all his words of piety , gave praise to God , and declared she was
in charity with all the world . The Priest turned to the young Knight . 
 " Sir bridegroom , " said he ,  " I leave you alone with her whom I have
made your wife . As far as I can discover , there is no evil , although
much that is mysterious , in her . I exhort you to be sober , loving , and
faithful . " So he went out; and the old people followed; crossing
themselves . 

Undine was still on her knees; she uncovered her face and looked
timidly at Huldbrand , saying ,  " Ah , thou wilt surely cast me off now;
and yet I have done nothing wrong , poor , poor child that I am ! " This
she said with so touching and gentle an expression , that her husband
forgot all the gloom and mystery that had chilled his heart; he
hastened toward , her and raised her in his arms . She smiled through
her tears--it was like the glow of dawn shining upon a clear fountain . 
 " Thou canst not forsake me ! " whispered she , in accents of the firmest
reliance; and she stroked his cheeks with her soft little hands . He
tried to shake off the gloomy thoughts which still lurked in a corner
of his mind , suggesting to him that he had married a fairy , or some
shadowy being from the world of spirits: one question , however , he
could not help asking:  " My dear little Undine , just tell me one thing:
what was that you said about spirits of earth , and Kühleborn , when the
Priest knocked at the door ? " -- " All nonsense ! " said Undine , laughing , 
with her usual gayety .  " First I frightened you with it , and then you
frightened me . And that is the end of the story , and of our
wedding-day ! " 


VIII . --THE DAY AFTER THE MARRIAGE

A bright morning light wakened the young people; and Huldbrand lay
musing silently . As often as he had dropped asleep , he had been scared
by horrible dreams of spectres who suddenly took the form of fair
women , or of fair women who were transformed into dragons . And when he
started up from these grim visions , and saw the pale , cold moonlight
streaming in at the window , he would turn an anxious look toward
Undine; she lay slumbering in undisturbed beauty and peace . Then he
would compose himself to sleep again--soon again to wake in terror . 
When he looked back upon all this in broad daylight , he was angry with
himself for having let a suspicion , a shade of distrust of his
beautiful wife , enter his mind . He frankly confessed to her this
injustice; she answered him only by pressing his hand , and sighing
from the bottom of her heart . But a look , such as her eyes had never
before given , of the deepest and most confiding tenderness , left him
no doubt that she forgave him . So he arose cheerfully , and joined the
family in the sitting-room . The three others were gathered round the
hearth looking uneasy , and neither of them having ventured to speak
his thoughts yet . The Priest seemed to be secretly praying for
deliverance from evil . But when the young husband appeared , beaming
with happiness , the care-worn faces brightened up; nay , the Fisherman
ventured upon a few courteous jokes with the Knight , which won a smile
even from the good housewife . Meanwhile Undine had dressed herself , 
and now came in; they could not help rising to meet her , and stood
still , astonished; the young creature was the same , yet so different . 
The Priest was the first to address her , with an air of paternal
kindness , and when he raised his hands in benediction , the fair woman
sank on her knees , trembling with pious awe . In a few meek and humble
words , she begged him to forgive the folly of the day before , and
besought him , with great emotion , to pray for the salvation of her
soul . Then rising , she kissed her foster parents , and thanking them
for all their kindness , she said:  " Oh , now I feel from the bottom of
my heart how much you have done for me , how deeply grateful I ought to
be , dear , dear people ! " She seemed as if she could not caress them
enough; but soon , observing the dame glance toward the breakfast , she
went toward the hearth , busied herself arranging and preparing the
meal , and would not suffer the good woman to take the least trouble
herself . 

So she went on all day; at once a young matron , and a bashful , tender , 
delicate bride . The three who knew her best were every moment
expecting this mood to change , and give place to one of her crazy
fits; but they watched in vain . There was still the same angelic
mildness and sweetness . The Priest could not keep his eyes away from
her , and he said more than once to the bridegroom ,  " Sir , it was a
great treasure which Heaven bestowed upon you yesterday , by my poor
ministration; cherish her worthily , and she will be to you a blessing
in time and eternity . " 

Toward evening , Undine clasped the Knight ' s arm with modest
tenderness , and gently led him out before the door , where the rays of
the setting sun were lighting up the fresh grass , and the tall , taper
stems of trees . The young wife ' s face wore a melting expression of
love and sadness , and her lips quivered with some anxious , momentous
secret , which as yet betrayed itself only by scarce audible sighs . She
silently led her companion onward; if he spoke , she replied by a look
which gave him no direct answer , but revealed a whole heaven of love
and timid submission . So they reached the banks of the stream which
had overflowed , and the Knight started on finding the wild torrent
changed into a gentle rippling brook , without a trace of its former
violence left .  " By to-morrow it will have dried up completely , " said
the bride , in a faltering voice ,  " and thou mayest begone whither thou
wilt . " -- " Not without thee , my Undine , " said the Knight , playfully;
 " consider , if I had a mind to forsake thee , the Church , the Emperor , 
and his ministers might step in , and bring thy truant home . " -- " No , no , 
you are free; it shall be as you please ! " murmured Undine , half tears , 
half smiles .  " But I think thou wilt not cast me away; is not my heart
bound up in thine ? Carry me over to that little island opposite . There
I will know my fate . I could indeed easily step through the little
waves; but I love to rest in thine arms ! and thou _mayest_ cast me
off; this may be the last time . " Huldbrand , full of anxious emotion , 
knew not how to answer . He took her up in his arms , and carried her
over , now recollecting that from this very island he had borne her
home to the Fisherman , on the night of his arrival . When there , he
placed his fair burden on the turf , and was going to sit down beside
her; but she said ,  " No , sit there , opposite me--I will read my doom in
your eyes , before your lips have spoken it . Now listen , and I will
tell you all . " And she began:--

 " You must know , my own love , that in each element exists a race of
beings , whose form scarcely differs from yours , but who very seldom
appear to mortal sight . In the flames , the wondrous Salamanders
glitter and disport themselves; in the depths of earth dwell the dry , 
spiteful race of Gnomes; the forests are peopled by Wood-nymphs , who
are also spirits of air; and the seas , the rivers and brooks contain
the numberless tribes of Water-sprites . Their echoing halls of
crystal , where the light of heaven pours in , with its sun and stars , 
are glorious to dwell in; the gardens contain beautiful coral plants , 
with blue and red fruits; they wander over bright sea-sands , and
gay-coloured shells , among the hidden treasures of the old world , too
precious to be bestowed on these latter days , and long since covered
by the silver mantle of the deep: many a noble monument still gleams
there below , bedewed by the tears of Ocean , who garlands it with
flowery sea-weeds and wreaths of shells . Those that dwell there below , 
are noble and lovely to behold , far more so than mankind . Many a
fisherman has had a passing glimpse of some fair water-nymph , rising
out of the sea with her song; he would then spread the report of her
apparition , and these wonderful beings came to be called _Undines_ . 
And you now see before you , my love , an Undine . " 

The Knight tried to persuade himself that his fair wife was in one of
her wild moods , and had invented this strange tale in sport . But
though he said this to himself , he could not for a moment believe it;
a mysterious feeling thrilled him; and , unable to utter a word , he
kept his eyes rivetted on the beautiful speaker . She shook her head
sadly , heaved a deep sigh , and went on:--

 " We might be happier than our human fellow-creatures  ( for we call you
fellow-creatures , as our forms are alike ) , but for one great evil . We , 
and the other children of the elements , go down to the dust , body and
spirit; not a trace of us remains and when the time comes for you to
rise again to a glorified existence , we shall have perished with our
native sands , flames , winds , and waves . For we have no souls; the
elements move us , obey us while we live , close over us when we die;
and we light spirits live as free from care as the nightingale , the
gold-fish , and all such bright children of Nature . But no creatures
rest content in their appointed place . My father , who is a mighty
prince in the Mediterranean Sea , determined that his only child should
be endowed with a soul , even at the cost of much suffering , which is
ever the lot of souls . But a soul can be infused into one of our race , 
only by being united in the closest bands of love to one of yours . And
now I have obtained a soul; to thee I owe it , O best beloved ! and for
that gift I shall ever bless thee , unless thou dost devote my whole
futurity to misery . For what is to become of me should thou recoil
from me , and cast me off ? Yet I would not detain thee by deceit . And
if I am to leave thee , say so now; go back to the land alone . I will
plunge into this brook; it is my uncle , who leads a wonderful , 
sequestered life in this forest , away from all his friends . But he is
powerful , and allied to many great rivers; and as he brought me here
to the Fisherman , a gay and laughing child , so he is ready to take me
back to my parents , a loving , suffering , forsaken woman . " 

She would have gone on; but Huldbrand , full of compassion and love , 
caught her in his arms , and carried her back . There , with tears and
kisses , he swore never to forsake his beloved wife; and said he felt
more blessed than the Greek sculptor Pygmalion , whose beautiful statue
dame Venus transformed into a living woman . Hanging on his arm in
peaceful reliance , Undine returned; and she felt from her inmost
heart , how little cause she had to regret the crystal palaces of her
father . 


IX . --HOW THE KNIGHT AND HIS YOUNG BRIDE DEPARTED

When Huldbrand awoke from sleep the next morning , he missed his fair
companion; and again he was tormented with a doubt , whether his
marriage , and the lovely Undine , might not be all a fairy dream . But
she soon reappeared , came up to him , and said ,  " I have been out early , 
to see if my uncle had kept his word . He has recalled all the straying
waters into his quiet bed , and now takes his lonely and pensive course
through the forest as he used to do . His friends in the lake and the
air are gone to rest also; all things have returned to their usual
calmness; and you may set out homeward on dry land , as soon as you
please . " Huldbrand felt as if dreaming still , so little could he
understand his wife ' s wonderful relations . But he took no notice of
this , and his sweet Undine ' s gentle attentions soon charmed every
uneasy thought away . 

A little while after , as they stood at the door together , looking over
the fair scene with its boundary of clear waters , his heart yearned so
toward this cradle of his love that he said:  " But why should we go
away so soon ? we shall never spend happier days in yonder world , than
we have passed in this peaceful nook . Let us at least see two or three
more suns go down here . " -- " As my Lord wishes , " answered Undine , with
cheerful submission;  " but , you see , the old people will be grieved at
parting with me , whenever it is; and if we give them time to become
acquainted with my soul , and with its new powers of loving and
honouring them , I fear that when I go , their aged hearts will break
under the load of sorrow . As yet , they take my gentle mood for a
passing whim , such as they saw me liable to formerly , like a calm on
the lake when the winds are lulled; and they will soon begin to love
some favourite tree or flower in my place . They must not learn to know
this newly obtained , affectionate heart , in the first overflowings of
its tenderness , just at the moment when they are to lose me for this
world; and how could I disguise it from them , if we remained together
longer ? " 

Huldbrand agreed with her; he went to the old couple and finding them
ready to consent , he resolved upon setting out that very hour . The
Priest offered to accompany them; after a hasty farewell , the pretty
bride was placed on the horse by her husband , and they crossed the
stream ' s dry bed quickly , and entered the forest . Undine shed silent
but bitter tears , while the old folks wailed after her aloud . It
seemed as if some foreboding were crossing their minds , of how great
their loss would prove . 

The three travellers reached the deepest shades of the forest , without
breaking silence . It was a fair sight to behold , as they passed
through the leafy bowers: the graceful woman sitting on her noble
steed , guarded on one side by the venerable Priest in the white habit
of his order; on the other , by the youthful Knight , with his gorgeous
attire and glittering sword . Huldbrand had no eyes but for his
precious wife; Undine , who had dried her duteous tears , no thought but
for him; and they soon fell into a noiseless interchange of glances
and signs , which at length was interrupted by the sound of a low
murmur , proceeding from the Priest and a fourth fellow-traveller , who
had joined them unobserved . He wore a white robe , very like the
Priest ' s dress , except that the hood almost covered his face , and the
rest of it floated round him in such large folds that he was
perpetually obliged to gather up , throw it over his arm , or otherwise
arrange it; yet it did not seem to impede him at all in walking; when
the young people saw him he was saying ,  " And so , my worthy father , I
have dwelt in the forest for many a year , yet I am not what you
commonly call a hermit . For , as I told you , I know nothing of penance , 
nor do I think it would do me much good . What makes me so fond of the
woods is , that I have a very particular fancy for winding through the
dark shades and forest walks , with my loose white clothes floating
about me; now and then a pretty sunbeam will glance over me as I
go . " -- " You seem to be a very curious person , " replied the Priest  " and
I should like to know more about you . " -- " And pray who are you , to
carry on the acquaintance ? " said the stranger .  " They call me Father
Heilmann , " answered the Priest ,  " and I belong to St . Mary ' s
monastery , beyond the lake . " -- " Ay , ay ! " rejoined the other .  " My name
is Kühleborn , and if I stood upon ceremony , I might well call myself
Lord of Kühleborn , or Baron  ( Freiherr ) Kühleborn; for free I am , as
the bird of the air , or a trifle more free . For instance , I must now
have a word with the young woman there . " And before they could look
round , he was on the other side of the Priest , close to Undine , and
stretching up his tall figure to whisper in her ear . But she turned
hastily away , saying ,  " I have nothing more to do with you
now . " -- " Heyday ! " said the stranger , laughing ,  " what a prodigiously
grand marriage yours must be , if you are to cast off your relations in
this way ! Have you forgotten Uncle Kühleborn , who brought you all the
way here on his back so kindly ? " 

 " But I entreat you , " said Undine ,  " never come to me again . I am afraid
of you now; and will not my husband become afraid of me , if he finds I
have so strange a family ? " -- " My little niece , " said Kühleborn ,  " please
to remember that I am protecting you all this time; the foul Spirits
of Earth might play you troublesome tricks if I did not . So you had
better let me go on with you , and no more words . The old Priest there
has a better memory than yours , for he would have it he knew my face
very well , and that I must have been with him in the boat , when he
fell into the water . And he may well say so , seeing that the wave
which washed him over was none but myself , and I landed him safe on
the shore , in time for your wedding . " 

Undine and the Knight looked at Father Heilmann , but he seemed to be
plodding on in a waking dream , and not listening to what was said . 
Undine said to Kühleborn ,  " There , I can see the end of the wood; we
want your help no longer , and there is nothing to disturb us but you . 
So in love and kindness I entreat you , begone , and let us go in
peace . " This seemed to make Kühleborn angry; he twisted his face
hideously , and hissed at Undine , who cried aloud for help . Like
lightning the Knight passed round her horse , and aimed a blow at
Kühleborn ' s head with his sword . But instead of the head , he struck
into a waterfall , which gushed down a high cliff near them , and now
showered them all with a splash that sounded like laughter , and wetted
them to the bone . The Priest , seeming to wake up , said ,  " Well , I was
expecting this , because that brook gushed down the rock so close to
us . At first I could not shake off the idea that it was a man , and was
speaking to me . " The waterfall whispered distinctly in Huldbrand ' s
ear ,  " Rash youth , dashing youth , I chide thee not , I shame thee not;
still shield thy precious wife safe and sure , rash young soldier , 
dashing Knight ! " 

A little further on they emerged into the open plains . The city lay
glittering before them , and the evening sun that gilded her towers , 
lent its grateful warmth to dry their soaked garments . 


X . --OF THEIR WAY OF LIFE IN THE TOWN

The sudden disappearance of the young Knight Huldbrand of Ringstetten
had made a great stir in the city , and distressed the inhabitants , 
with whom his gallantry in the lists and the dance , and his gentle , 
courteous manners , had made him very popular . His retainers would not
leave the place without their master , but yet none had the courage to
seek him in the haunted forest . They therefore remained in their
hostelry , idly hoping , as men are so apt to do , and keeping alive the
remembrance of their lost lord by lamentations . But soon after , when
the tempest raged and the rivers overflowed , few doubted that the
handsome stranger must have perished . Bertalda , among others , mourned
him for lost , and was ready to curse herself , for having urged him to
the fatal ride through the forest . Her ducal foster parents had
arrived to take her away , but she prevailed upon them to wait a
little , in hope that a true report of Huldbrand ' s death or safety
might reach them . She tried to persuade some of the young knights who
contended for her favour , to venture into the forest and seek for the
noble adventurer . But she would not offer her hand as the reward , 
because she still hoped to bestow it some day on the wanderer himself;
and to obtain a glove , a scarf , or some such token from her , none of
them cared to expose his life to bring back so dangerous a rival . 

Now , when Huldbrand unexpectedly reappeared , it spread joy among his
servants , and all the people generally , except Bertalda; for while the
others were pleased at his bringing with him such a beautiful wife , 
and Father Heilmann to bear witness to their marriage , it could not
but grieve _her_: first , because the young Knight had really won her
heart; and next , because she had betrayed her feelings by so openly
lamenting his absence , far more than was now becoming . However , she
behaved like a prudent woman and suited her conduct to the
circumstances , by living in the most cordial intimacy with Undine--who
passed in the town for a princess , released by Huldbrand from the
power of some wicked enchanter of the forest . If she or her husband
were questioned about it , they gave evasive answers; Father Heilmann ' s
lips were sealed on all such idle topics , beside which , he had left
them soon after they arrived , and returned to his cloister: so the
citizens were left to their own wondering conjectures , and even
Bertalda came no nearer the truth than others . 

Meanwhile , Undine grew daily more fond of this winning damsel .  " We
must have known each other before , " she would often say ,  " or else some
secret attraction draws us toward each other; for without some cause , 
some strange , mysterious cause , I am sure nobody would love another as
I have loved you from the moment we met . " Bertalda , on her part , could
not deny that she felt strongly inclined to like Undine , 
notwithstanding the grounds of complaint she thought she had against
this happy rival . The affection being mutual , the one persuaded her
parents , the other her wedded lord , to defer the day of departure
repeatedly; they even went so far as to propose that Bertalda should
accompany Undine to the castle of Ringstetten , near the source of the
Danube . 

They were talking of this one fine evening , as they sauntered by
starlight round the market-place , which was surrounded by high trees;
the young couple had invited Bertalda to join their evening stroll , 
and they now paced backward and forward in pleasant talk , with the
dark blue sky over their heads , and a beautiful fountain before them
in the centre , which , as it bubbled and sprang up into fanciful
shapes , often caught their attention , and interrupted the
conversation . All around them was serene and pleasant; through the
foliage gleamed the light of many a lamp from the surrounding houses;
and the ear was soothed by the hum of children at play , and of
sauntering groups like themselves; they enjoyed at once the pleasure
of solitude , and the social happiness of being near the cheerful
haunts of men . Every little difficulty that had occurred to their
favourite plan , seemed to vanish upon nearer examination , and the
three friends could not imagine that Bertalda ' s consent to the journey
need be delayed a moment . But as she was on the point of naming a day
for joining them and setting out , a very tall man came forward from
the middle of the place , bowed to them respectfully , and began
whispering in Undine ' s ear . She though apparently displeased with the
interruption and with the speaker , stepped aside with him , and they
began a low discourse together , in what sounded like a foreign
language . Huldbrand thought he knew this strange man ' s face , and fixed
his attention upon him so earnestly , that he neither heard nor
answered the astonished Bertalda ' s questions . All at once Undine
clapped her hands joyfully , and turned her back , laughing , upon the
stranger; he shook his head and walked off in an angry , hurried
manner , and stepped into the fountain . This confirmed Huldbrand in his
guess; while Bertalda inquired ,  " My dear Undine , what business had
that man of the fountain with you ? " Her friend smiled archly and
replied ,  " On your birthday , the day after to-morrow , I will tell you , 
my sweet girl; " and she would say no more . She only pressed Bertalda
to come and dine with them on that day , and bring her foster parents;
after which they separated . 

 " Kühleborn ? " said Huldbrand to his wife with a suppressed shudder , as
they walked home through the dark streets .  " Yes , it was he , " replied
Undine  " and he tried to put all sorts of nonsense into my head . 
However , without intending it he delighted me by one piece of news . If
you wish to hear it , now , my kind lord , you have but to say so , and I
will tell you every word . But if you like to give your Undine a _very_
great delight , you will wait two days , and then have your share in the
surprise . " 

The Knight readily granted her what she had asked so meekly and
gracefully; and as she dropped asleep she murmured ,  " How it will
delight her ! how little she expects such a message from the mysterious
man--dear , dear Bertalda ! " 


XI . --BERTALDA ' S BIRTHDAY

The guests were now assembled at table; Bertalda sat at the top , 
adorned with flowers like the goddess of spring , and flashing with
jewels , the gifts of many friends and relations . Undine and Huldbrand
were on either side of her . When the sumptuous meal was ended , and the
dessert served , the doors were opened--according to the good old
German custom--to let the common people look in and have their share
in the gaiety of the rich . The attendants offered wine and cake to the
assembled crowd . Huldbrand and Bertalda were eagerly watching for the
promised disclosure , and both kept their eyes fixed upon Undine . But
she was still silent; her cheeks dimpled occasionally with a bright , 
conscious smile . Those that knew what she was about to do , could
perceive that her interesting secret was ready to burst from her lips , 
but that she was playfully determined to keep it in , as children
sometimes will save their daintiest morsels for the last . Her silent
glee communicated itself to the other two , who watched impatiently for
the happy news that was about to gladden their hearts . Some of the
company now asked Undine for a song . She seemed to be prepared with
one , and sent for her lute , to which she sang as follows:--

The sun gilds the wave , 
 The flowers are sweet , 
And the ocean doth lave
 The grass at our feet ! 

What lies on the earth
 So blooming and gay ? 
Doth a blossom peep forth
 And greet the new day ? 

Ah ,  ' tis a fair child ! 
 She sports with the flowers , 
So gladsome and mild , 
 Through the warm sunny hours

O sweet one , who brought thee ? 
 From far distant shore
Old Ocean he caught thee , 
 And many a league bore . 

Poor babe , all in vain
 Thou dost put forth thy hand
None clasp it again , 
  ' Tis a bleak foreign land:

The flowers bloom brightly , 
 And soft breathes the air , 
But all pass thee lightly:
 Thy mother is far ! 

Thy life scarce begun , 
 Thy smiles fresh from heaven , 
Thy best treasure is gone , 
 To another  ' tis given . 

A gallant charger treads the dell , 
 His noble rider pities thee;
He takes thee home , he tends thee well , 
 And cares for thee right gen ' rously . 

Well thou becom ' st thy station high , 
 And bloom ' st the fairest in the land;
And yet , alas ! the purest joy
 Is left on thine own distant strand . 

Undine put down her lute with a melancholy smile and the eyes of the
Duke and Duchess filled with tears:  " So it was when I found you , my
poor innocent orphan ! " said the Duke with great emotion  " as the fair
singer said , your best treasure was gone and we have been unable to
supply its place . " 

 " Now let us think of the poor parents , " said Undine and she struck
the chords and sang:--

 I

Mother roves from room to room
 Seeking rest , she knows not how , 
The house is silent as the tomb , 
 And who is there to bless her now ? 

 II

Silent house ! Oh words of sorrow ! 
 Where is now her darling child ? 
She who should have cheered the morrow , 
 And the evening hours beguiled ? 

 III

The buds are swelling on the tree , 
 The sun returns when night is o ' er;
But , mother , ne ' er comes joy to thee , 
 Thy child shall bless thine eyes no more . 

 IV

And when the evening breezes blow , 
 And father seeks his own fireside , 
He smiles , forgetful of his woe , 
 But ah ! his tears that smile shall hide . 

 V

Father knows that in his home
 Deathlike stillness dwells for aye;
The voice of mirth no more shall come , 
 And mother sighs the livelong day . 

 " O Undine , for God ' s sake , where are my parents ? " cried Bertalda , 
weeping .  " Surely you know , you have discovered it , most wonderful
woman; else how could you have stirred my inmost heart as you have
done ? They are perhaps even now in the room--can it be ? " --and her eyes
glanced over the gay assembly , and fixed upon a reigning Princess who
sat next to the Duke . But Undine bent forward to the door , her eyes
overflowing with the happiest tears .  " Where are they , the poor anxious
parents ? " said she; and the old Fisherman and his wife came out from
the crowd of bystanders . They turned an inquiring eye upon Undine , and
then upon the handsome lady whom they were to call daughter .  " There
she is , " faltered the delighted Undine , and the aged couple caught
their long-lost child in their arms , thanking God , and weeping aloud . 

Affrighted and enraged , Bertalda shrank from their embrace . It was
more than her proud spirit could bear , to be thus degraded; at a
moment , too , when she was fully expecting an increase of splendour , 
and fancy was showering pearls and diadems upon her head . She
suspected that her rival had contrived this , on purpose to mortify her
before Huldbrand and all the world . She reviled both Undine and the
old people; the hateful words ,  " Treacherous creature ! and bribed
wretches ! " burst from her lips . The old woman said in a half whisper , 
 " Dear me , she has grown up a wicked woman; and yet my heart tells me
she is my own child . " The Fisherman has clasped his hands , and was
praying silently that this girl might not prove to be theirs indeed . 
Undine , pale as death , looked from Bertalda to the parents , from the
parents to Bertalda , and could not recover the rude shock she had
sustained , at being plunged from all her happy dreams into a state of
fear and misery , such as she had never known before . 

 " Have you a soul ? Have you indeed a soul , Bertalda ? " she exclaimed
once or twice , trying to recall her angry friend to reason , from what
she took for a fit of madness , or a kind of nightmare . But Bertalda
only stormed the louder; the repulsed parents wailed piteously , and
the company began to dispute angrily and to side with one or the
other; when Undine stepped forward , and asked with so much earnest
gentleness to be listened to in her husband ' s house that all was
hushed in a moment . She took the place which Bertalda had left , at
the head of the table , and as she stood there in modest dignity , the
eyes of all turned toward her , and she said:  " You all that cast such
angry looks at each other , and so cruelly spoil the joy of my poor
feast , alas ! I little knew what your foolish angry passions were , and
I think I never shall understand you . What I had hoped would do so
much good has led to all this; but that is not my fault , it is your
own doing , believe me; I have little more to say , but one thing you
must hear: I have told no falsehood . Proofs I have none to give , 
beyond my word , but I will swear to the truth of it . I heard it from
him who decoyed Bertalda from her parents into the water , and then
laid her down in the meadow where the Duke was to pass . " 

 " She is a sorceress , " cried Bertalda ,  " a witch who has dealings with
evil spirits ! she has acknowledged it . " 

 " I have not , " said Undine , with a heaven of innocence and
guilelessness in her eyes .  " Nor am I a witch--only look at me ! " 

 " Then she lies , " cried Bertalda ,  " and she dares not assert that I was
born of these mean people . My noble parents , I beseech you take me out
of this room , and this town , where they are leagued together to insult
me . " 

But the venerable Duke stood still , and his lady said ,  " We must first
sift this matter to the bottom . Nothing shall make me leave the room
till my doubts are satisfied . " 

Then the old woman came up , made a deep obeisance to the Duchess , and
said ,  " You give me courage to speak , my noble , worthy lady . I must
tell you , that if this ungodly young woman is my daughter , I shall
know her by a violet mark between her shoulders , and another on the
left instep . If she would but come with me into another room-- " 

 " I will not uncover myself before that country-woman , " said Bertalda , 
proudly turning away . 

 " But before me , you will , " rejoined the Duchess gravely .  " You shall go
with me into that room , young woman , and the good dame will accompany
us . " They withdrew together , leaving the party in silent suspense . In
a few minutes they came back; Bertalda was deadly pale , and the
Duchess said ,  " Truth is truth , and I am bound to declare that our Lady
Hostess has told us perfectly right . Bertalda is the Fisherman ' s
daughter; more than that , it concerns nobody to know . " And the
princely pair departed , taking with them their adopted child , and
followed  ( upon a sign from the Duke ) by the Fisherman and his wife . 
The rest of the assembly broke up , in silence or with secret murmurs , 
and Undine sank into Huldbrand ' s arms , weeping bitterly . 


XII . --HOW THEY LEFT THE IMPERIAL CITY

There was certainly much to displease the Lord of Ringstetten in the
events of this day; yet he could not look back upon them , without
feeling proud of the guileless truth and the generosity of heart shown
by his lovely wife .  " If indeed her soul was my gift , " thought he ,  " it
is nevertheless much better than my own; " and he devoted himself to
the task of soothing her grief , and determined he would take her away
the next morning from a spot now so full of bitter recollections . 

They were mistaken , however , in thinking that she had lost in the eyes
of the world by this adventure . So prepared were the minds of the
people to find something mysterious in her , that her strange discovery
of Bertalda ' s origin scarcely surprised them; while , on the other
hand , everyone that heard of Bertalda ' s history and of her passionate
behaviour , was moved with indignation . Of this , the Knight and Undine
were not aware; nor would it have given them any comfort , for she was
still as jealous of Bertalda ' s good name as of her own . Upon the
whole , they had no greater wish than to leave the town without delay . 

At daybreak next morning , Undine ' s chariot was in readiness at the
door , and the steeds of Huldbrand and of his squires stood around it , 
pawing the ground with impatience . As the Knight led his fair bride to
the door , a fishing girl accosted them .  " We want no fish , " said
Huldbrand;  " we are just going away . " The girl began to sob bitterly , 
and they then recognised her as Bertalda . They immediately turned back
into the house with her; and she said that the Duke and Duchess had
been so incensed at her violence the day before , as to withdraw their
protection from her , though not without giving her a handsome
allowance . The Fisherman too had received a liberal gift , and had
departed that evening with his wife , to return to the promontory .  " I
would have gone with them , " she continued ,  " but the old Fisherman , 
whom they call my father-- " 

 " And so he is , Bertalda , " interrupted Undine .  " He is your father . For
the man you saw at the fountain told me how it is . He was trying to
persuade me that I had better not take you to Ringstetten , and he let
drop the secret . " 

 " Well then , " said Bertalda ,  " my father--if so it must be--my father
said ,  ' You shall not live with us till you are an altered creature . 
Take courage and come across the haunted forest to us; that will show
that you sincerely wish to belong to your parents . But do not come in
your finery; be like what you are , a fisherman ' s daughter . ' And I will
do as he bids me; for the whole world has forsaken me , and I have
nothing left , but to live and die humbly in a poor hut , alone with my
lowly parents . I do dread the forest very much . They say it is full of
grim spectres , and I am so timid ! But what can I do ? I came here only
to implore the Lady of Ringstetten ' s pardon for my rude language
yesterday . I have no doubt you meant what you did kindly , noble Dame;
but you little knew what a trial your words would be to me , and I was
so alarmed and bewildered , that many a hasty , wicked word escaped my
lips . Ah forgive me , forgive me ! I am unhappy enough already . Only
consider what I was yesterday morning , even at the beginning of your
feast , and what I am now . " 

Her words were lost in a flood of bitter tears , and Undine , equally
affected , fell weeping on her neck . It was long before her emotion
would let her speak: at length she said ,  " You shall go to Ringstetten
with us; all shall be as we had settled it before; only call me Undine
again , and not  ' Lady ' and  ' noble Dame . ' You see , we began by being
exchanged in our cradles; our lives have been linked from that hour , 
and we will try to bind them so closely that no human power shall
sever us . Come with us to Ringstetten , and all will be well . We will
live like sisters there , trust me for arranging that . " Bertalda looked
timidly at Huldbrand . The sight of this beautiful , forsaken maiden
affected him; he gave her his hand and encouraged her kindly to trust
herself to him and his wife .  " As to your parents , " said he ,  " we will
let them know why you do not appear; " and he would have said much more
concerning the good old folks , but he observed that Bertalda shuddered
at the mention of them , and therefore dropped the subject . He gave her
his arm , placed first her and then Undine in the carriage , and rode
cheerfully after them; he urged the drivers on so effectually , that
they very soon found themselves out of sight of the city , and beyond
the reach of sad recollections--and the two ladies could fully enjoy
the beautiful country through which the road wound along . 

After a few days ' travelling , they arrived , one sunny evening , at the
Castle of Ringstetten . Its young lord had much business with his
steward and labourers to occupy him , so that Undine was left alone
with Bertalda . They took a walk on the high ramparts of the castle , 
and admired the rich Swabian landscape , which lay far and wide around
them . A tall man suddenly came up , with a courteous obeisance; and
Bertalda could not help thinking him very like the ominous man of the
fountain . The likeness struck her still more , when , upon an impatient
and even menacing gesture of Undine ' s , he went away with the same
hasty step and shake of the head as before . 

 " Do not be afraid , dear Bertalda , " said Undine ,  " the ugly man shall
not harm you this time . " After which she told her whole history , 
beginning from her birth , and how they had been exchanged in their
earliest childhood . At first her friend looked at her with serious
alarm; she thought Undine was possessed by some delirium . But she
became convinced it was all true , as she listened to the
well-connected narrative , which accounted so well for the strange
events of the last months; besides which , there is something in
genuine truth which finds an answer in every heart , and can hardly be
mistaken . She was bewildered , when she found herself one of the actors
in a living fairy tale , and as wild a tale as any she had read . She
gazed upon Undine with reverence; but could not help feeling a chill
thrown over her affection for her; and that evening at supper time , 
she wondered at the Knight ' s fond love and familiarity toward a being , 
whom she now looked upon as rather a spirit than a human creature . 


XIII . --HOW THEY LIVED IN THE CASTLE OF RINGSTETTEN

As he who relates this tale is moved to the heart by it , and hopes
that it may affect his readers too , he entreats of them one favour;
namely , that they will bear with him while he passes rapidly over a
long space of time; and be content if he barely touches upon what
happened therein . He knows well that some would relate in great
detail , step by step , how Huldbrand ' s heart began to be estranged from
Undine , and drawn toward Bertalda; while she cared not to disguise
from him her ardent love; and how between them the poor injured wife
came to be rather feared than pitied--and when he showed her kindness , 
a cold shiver would often creep over him and send him back to the
child of earth , Bertalda;--all this the author knows , might be dwelt
upon; nay , perhaps it ought to be so . But his heart shrinks from such
a task , for he has met with such passages in real life , and cannot
even abide their shadows in his memory . Perhaps , gentle reader , such
feelings are known to thee also , for they are the common lot of mortal
man . Well is thee if thou hast felt , not inflicted , these pangs; in
these cases it is more blessed to receive than to give . As such
recollections wake up from their cells , they will but cast a soft
shade over the past; and it may be the thought of thy withered
blossoms , once so fondly loved , brings a gentle tear down thy cheek . 
Enough of this: we will not go on to pierce our hearts with a thousand
separate arrows , but content ourselves with saying , that so it
happened in the present instance . 

Poor Undine drooped day by day , and the others were neither of them
happy; Bertalda especially was uneasy , and ready to suspect the
injured wife , whenever she fancied herself slighted by Huldbrand;
meantime she had gradually assumed the command in the house , and the
deluded Huldbrand supported her openly . Undine looked on , in meek
resignation . To increase the discomfort of their lives , there was no
end to the mysterious sights and sounds that haunted Huldbrand and
Bertalda in the vaulted galleries of the castle; such as had never
been heard of before . The long white man , too well known to him as
Uncle Kühleborn , and to her as the spirit of the fountain , often
showed his threatening countenance to both; but chiefly to Bertalda , 
who had more than once been made ill by the fright , and thought
seriously of leaving the castle . But her love for Huldbrand detained
her , and she quieted her conscience by thinking , that it had never
come to a declaration of love between them; and , besides , she would
not have known which way to turn . After receiving the Lord of
Ringstetten ' s message , that Bertalda was with them , the old Fisherman
had traced a few lines , scarcely legible , from infirmity and long
disuse , saying ,  " I am now a poor old widower; for my dear good wife is
dead . But , lonely as I am by my fireside , I had rather Bertalda stayed
away than come here . Provided she does not harm my dear Undine ! My
curse be upon her if she does . " Bertalda scattered these last words to
the winds , but treasured up her father ' s command that she should not
join him: as is the way with us selfish beings . 

One day , when Huldbrand had just ridden out , Undine sent for her
servants and desired them to fetch a large stone and carefully to stop
up the mouth of the magnificent fountain , which played in the centre
of the court . The men objected , that they must then always go down the
valley to a great distance for water . Undine smiled mournfully .  " It
grieves me to add to your burdens , my good friends , " said she ,  " I had
rather go and fill my pitcher myself; but this fountain must be
sealed up . Trust me , nothing else will do , and it is our only way of
escaping a much worse evil . " 

The servants rejoiced at any opportunity of pleasing their gentle
mistress; not a word more was said , and they lifted the huge stone . 
They had raised it , and were about to let it down on the mouth of the
spring , when Bertalda ran up , calling out to them to stop: the water
of this fountain was the best for her complexion , and she never would
consent to its being stopped . But Undine , instead of yielding as
usual , kept firmly , though gently , to her resolution; she said that it
behooved her , as mistress of the house , to order all such matters as
appeared best to her , and none but her lord and husband should call
her to account .  " Look , oh look ! " cried Bertalda , eagerly and angrily , 
 " how the poor bright water curls and writhes , because you would
deprive it of every gleam of sunshine , and of the cheerful faces of
men , whose mirror it was created to be ! " In truth , the spring did
writhe and bubble up wonderfully , just as if someone were trying to
force his way through; but Undine pressed them the more to dispatch
the work . Nor was there much need to repeat her commands . The
household people were too glad at once to obey their gentle lady , and
to mortify the pride of Bertalda , in spite of whose threats and wrath , 
the stone was soon firmly fastened down on the mouth of the spring . 
Undine bent over it thoughtfully , and wrote on its surface with her
delicate fingers . Something very hard and sharp must have been hidden
in her hand; for when she walked away , and the others came up , they
found all manner of strange characters on the stone , none of which
were there before . 

When the Knight came home that evening , Bertalda received him with
tears and complaints of Undine . He looked sternly at his poor wife , 
who mournfully cast down her eyes , saying , however , with firmness ,  " My
lord and husband would not chide the meanest of his vassals , without
giving him a hearing , much less his wedded wife . " -- " Speak , then; what
was your reason for this strange proceeding ? " said the Knight with a
frown .  " I would rather tell it you quite alone ! " sighed Undine .  " You
can say it just as well in Bertalda ' s presence , " replied he .  " Yes , if
thou requirest it , " said Undine ,  " but require it not . " She looked so
humble , and so submissive in her touching beauty , that the Knight ' s
heart was melted , as by a sunbeam from happier days . He took her
affectionately by the hand , and led her to his own room , where she
spoke to him as follows . 

 " You know that wicked Uncle Kühleborn , my dearest lord , and have often
been provoked at meeting him about the castle . Bertalda , too , has been
often terrified by him . No wonder; he is soulless , shallow , and
unthinking as a mirror , in whom no feeling can pierce the surface . He
has two or three times seen that you were displeased with me , that I
in my childishness could not help weeping , and that Bertalda might
chance to laugh at the same moment . And upon this he builds all manner
of unjust suspicions , and interferes , unasked , in our concerns . What
is the use of my reproaching him , or repulsing him with angry words ? 
He believes nothing that I say . A poor cold life is his ! How should he
know , that the sorrows and the joys of love are so sweetly alike , so
closely linked , that it is not in human power to part them . When a
tear gushes out , a smile lies beneath; and a smile will draw the tears
from their secret cells . " 

She smiled through her tears in Huldbrand ' s face , and a warm ray of
his former love shot through his heart . She perceived this , pressed
closer to him , and with a few tears of joy she went on . 

 " As I found it impossible to get rid of our tormentor by words , I had
nothing for it , but to shut the door against him . And his only access
to us was that fountain . He has quarrelled with the other fountain
spirits in the surrounding valleys , and it is much lower down the
Danube , below the junction of some friends with the great river , that
his power begins again . Therefore I stopped the mouth of our fountain , 
and inscribed the stone with characters which cripple the might of my
restless uncle; so that he can no longer cross your path , or mine , or
Bertalda ' s . Men can indeed lift the stone off as easily as ever; the
inscription has no power over them . So you are free to comply with
Bertalda ' s wish; but indeed , she little knows what she asks . Against
her the wild Kühleborn has a most particular spite , and if some of his
forebodings were to come true ,  ( as they might , without her intending
any harm ) O , dearest , even thou wert not free from danger ! " 

Huldbrand deeply felt the generosity of his noble-minded wife , in so
zealously shutting out her formidable protector , even when reviled by
Bertalda for so doing . He clasped her fondly in his arms , and said
with much emotion ,  " The stone shall remain; and everything shall be
done as thou wishest , now and hereafter , my sweetest Undine . " 

Scarce could she trust these words of love , after so dreary an
estrangement; she returned his caresses with joyful but timid
gratitude , and at length said ,  " My own dear love , as you are so
exceedingly kind to me to-day , may I ask you to promise one thing ? 
Herein you are like the summer: is he not most glorious when he decks
his brows with thunders , and frowns upon us from his throne of clouds ? 
So it is when your eyes flash lightning; it becomes you well , 
although in my weakness I may often shed a tear at it . Only--if you
would promise to refrain from it when we are sailing , or even near any
water . For there , you see , my relations have a right to control me . 
They might relentlessly tear me from you in their wrath , fancying that
there is an insult offered to one of their race; and I should be
doomed to spend the rest of my life in the crystal palaces below , 
without ever coming to you; or if they did send me up again--oh
Heaven , that would be far worse ! No , no , my best beloved; you will not
let it come to that , if you love your poor Undine . " 

He solemnly promised to do as she asked him , and they returned to the
saloon , quite restored to comfort and peace . They met Bertalda , 
followed by a few labourers whom she had sent for , and she said in a
tone of bitterness that had grown common with her of late ,  " So , now
your private consultation is over , and we may have the stone taken up . 
Make haste , you people , and do it for me . " But Huldbrand , incensed at
her arrogance , said shortly and decidedly ,  " The stone shall not be
touched , " and he then reproved Bertalda for her rudeness to his wife;
upon which the labourers walked off , exulting secretly , while Bertalda
hurried away to her chamber , pale and disturbed . 

The hour of supper came , and they waited in vain for Bertalda . A
message was sent to her; the servants found her room empty , and
brought back only a sealed letter directed to the Knight . He opened it
with trepidation and read ,  " I feel with shame that I am only a
fisherman ' s daughter . Having forgotten it a moment , I will expiate my
crime in the wretched hut of my parents . Live happy with your
beautiful wife ! " 

Undine was sincerely grieved; she entreated Huldbrand to pursue their
friend at once , and bring her back with him . Alas ! there was little
need of entreaty . His passion for Bertalda returned with fresh
violence; he searched the castle all over , asking everyone if they
could tell him in what direction the fair one had fled . He could
discover nothing; and now he had mounted his horse in the court , and
stood ready to set forth , and try the route by which he had brought
Bertalda to the castle . A peasant boy just then came up , saying that
he had met the lady riding toward the Black Valley . Like a shot the
Knight darted through the gate , and took that direction , without
heeding Undine ' s anxious cries from a window:  " To the Black Valley ? 
oh , not there ! Huldbrand , not there ! Or take me with you for God ' s
sake ! " Finding it vain to cry , she had her white palfrey saddled in
all haste , and galloped after her husband , without allowing anyone to
attend her . 


XIV . --HOW BERTALDA DROVE HOME WITH THE KNIGHT

The Black Valley lay among the deepest recesses of the mountains . What
it is called now none can tell . In those times it bore that name among
the countrymen , on account of the deep gloom shed over it by many high
trees , mostly pines . Even the brook which gushed down between the
cliffs was tinged with black , and never sparkled like the merry
streams from which nothing intercepts the blue of heaven . Now , in the
dusk of twilight , it looked darker still as it gurgled between the
rocks . The Knight spurred his horse along its banks , now fearing to
lose ground in his pursuit , and now again , that he might overlook the
fugitive in her hiding-place , if he hurried past too swiftly . He
presently found himself far advanced in the valley , and hoped he must
soon overtake her , if he were but in the right track . Then again , the
thought that it might be a wrong one roused the keenest anxiety in
his breast . Where was the tender Bertalda to lay her head , if he
missed her in this bleak , stormy night , which was setting in , black
and awful , upon the valley ? And now he saw something white gleaming
through the boughs , on the slope of the mountain; he took it for
Bertalda ' s robe and made for it . But the horse started back , and
reared so obstinately that Huldbrand , impatient of delay , and having
already found him difficult to manage among the brambles of the
thicket , dismounted , and fastened the foaming steed to a tree; he then
felt his way through the bushes on foot . The boughs splashed his head
and cheeks roughly with cold wet dew; far off , he heard the growl of
thunder beyond the mountains , and the whole strange scene had such an
effect upon him , that he became afraid of approaching the white
figure , which he now saw lying on the ground at a short distance . And
yet he could distinguish it to be a woman , dressed in long white
garments like Bertalda ' s , asleep or in a swoon . He came close to her , 
made the boughs rustle , and his sword ring--but she stirred not . 
 " Bertalda ! " cried he; first gently , then louder and louder--in vain . 
When at length he shouted the beloved name with the whole strength of
his lungs , a faint mocking echo returned it from the cavities of the
rocks-- " Bertalda ! " but the sleeper awoke not . He bent over her; but
the gloom of the valley and the shades of night prevented his
discerning her features . At length , though kept back by some boding
fears , he knelt down by her on the earth , and just then a flash of
lightning lighted up the valley . He saw a hideous distorted face close
to his own , and heard a hollow voice say ,  " Give me a kiss , thou sweet
shepherd ! " With a cry of horror Huldbrand started up , and the monster
after him .  " Go home ! " it cried ,  " the bad spirits are abroad--go home ! 
or I have you ! " and its long white arm nearly grasped him .  " Spiteful
Kühleborn , " cried the Knight , taking courage ,  " what matters it , I know
thee , foul spirit ! There is a kiss for thee ! " And he raised his sword
furiously against the figure . But it dissolved , and a drenching shower
made it sufficiently clear to the Knight what enemy he had
encountered .  " He would scare me away from Bertalda , " said he aloud to
himself;  " he thinks he can subdue me by his absurd tricks , and make me
leave the poor terrified maiden in his power , that he may wreak his
vengeance upon her . But _that_ he never shall--wretched goblin ! What
power lies in a human breast when steeled by firm resolve , the
contemptible juggler has yet to learn . " And he felt the truth of his
own words , and seemed to have nerved himself afresh by them . He
thought , too , that fortune now began to aid him , for before he had got
back to his horse again , he distinctly heard the piteous voice of
Bertalda as if near at hand , borne toward him on the winds as their
howling mingled with the thunder . Eagerly did he push on in that
direction , and he found the trembling damsel was just attempting to
climb the mountain ' s side , in order , at any risk , to get out of these
awful shades . 

He met her affectionately and however proudly she might before have
determined to hold out , she could not but rejoice at being rescued by
her much-loved Huldbrand from the fearful solitude , and warmly invited
to return to his cheerful home in the castle . She accompanied him with
scarcely a word of reluctance , but was so exhausted , that the Knight
felt much relieved when they had reached the horse in safety; he
hastened to loose him , and would have placed his tender charge upon
him , and walked by her side to guide her carefully through the
dangerous shades . But Kühleborn ' s mad pranks had driven the horse
quite wild . Hardly could the Knight himself have sprung upon the
terrified plunging creature ' s back: to place the trembling Bertalda
upon him was quite impossible; so they made up their minds to walk
home . With his horse ' s bridle over one arm , Huldbrand supported his
half-fainting companion on the other . Bertalda mustered what strength
she could , in order the sooner to get beyond this dreaded valley , but
fatigue weighed her down like lead , and every limb shook under her;
partly from the recollection of all she had already suffered from
Kühleborn ' s spite , and partly from terror at the continued crashing of
the tempest through the mountain forests . 

At length she slid down from her protector ' s arm , and sinking on the
moss , she said:  " Leave me to die here , noble Huldbrand; I reap the
punishment of my folly , and must sink under this load of fatigue and
anguish . " -- " Never , my precious friend , never will I forsake you , " 
cried Huldbrand , vainly striving to curb his raging steed , who was now
beginning to start and plunge worse than ever: the Knight contrived to
keep him at some distance from the exhausted maiden , so as to save her
the terror of seeing him near her . But no sooner had he withdrawn
himself and the wild animal a few steps , than she began to call him
back in the most piteous manner , thinking he was indeed going to
desert her in this horrible wilderness . He was quite at a loss what to
do: gladly would he have let the horse gallop away in the darkness and
expend his wild fury , but that he feared he might rush down upon the
very spot where Bertalda lay . 

In this extremity of distress , it gave him unspeakable comfort to
descry a wagon slowly descending the stony road behind him . He called
out for help: a man ' s voice replied telling him to have patience , but
promising to come to his aid; soon two white horses became visible
through the thicket , and next the white smock-frock of the wagoner , 
and a large sheet of white linen that covered his goods inside .  " Ho , 
stop ! " cried the man , and the obedient horses stood still .  " I see well
enough , " said he ,  " what ails the beast . When first I came through
these parts my horses were just as troublesome; because there is a
wicked water-sprite living hard by , who takes delight in making them
play tricks . But I know a charm for this; if you will give me leave to
whisper it in your horse ' s ear , you will see him as quiet as mine
yonder in a moment . " -- " Try your charm , if it will do any good ! " said
the impatient Knight . The driver pulled the unruly horse ' s head toward
him , and whispered a couple of words in his ear . At once the animal
stood still , tamed and pacified , and showed no remains of his former
fury but by panting and snorting , as if he still chafed inwardly . This
was no time for Huldbrand to inquire how it had been done . He agreed
with the wagoner that Bertalda should be taken into the wagon , which
by his account was loaded with bales of soft cotton , and conveyed to
the Castle of Ringstetten , while the Knight followed on horseback . But
his horse seemed too much spent by his former violence to be able to
carry his master so far , and the man persuaded Huldbrand to get into
the wagon with Bertalda . The horse was to be fastened behind .  " We
shall go down hill , " said the man ,  " and that is light work for my
horses . " The Knight placed himself by Bertalda , his horse quietly
followed them , and the driver walked by steadily and carefully . 

In the deep stillness of night , while the storm growled more and more
distant , and in the consciousness of safety and easy progress , 
Huldbrand and Bertalda insensibly got into confidential discourse . He
tenderly reproached her for having so hastily fled; she excused
herself with bashful emotions , and through all she said it appeared
most clearly that her heart was all his own . Huldbrand was too much
engrossed by the expression of her words to attend to their apparent
meaning , and he only replied to the former . Upon this , the wagoner
cried out in a voice that rent the air ,  " Now my horses , up with you;
show us what you are made of , my fine fellows . " The Knight put out his
head and saw the horses treading or rather swimming through the
foaming waters , while the wheels whirled loudly and rapidly like those
of a water-mill , and the wagoner was standing upon the top of his
wagon , overlooking the floods .  " Why , what road is this ? It will take
us into the middle of the stream , " cried Huldbrand .  " No , sir , " cried
the driver laughing;  " it is just the other way . The stream is coming
into the middle of the road . Look round , and see how it is all
flooded . " 

In fact , the whole valley was now heaving with waves , that had swollen
rapidly to a great height .  " This must be Kühleborn , the wicked sprite , 
trying to drown us ! " cried the Knight .  " Have you no charm to keep him
off , friend ? " -- " I do know of one , " said the driver ,  " but I can ' t and
won ' t make use of it , till you know who I am . " -- " Is this a time for
riddles ? " shouted the Knight;  " the flood is rising every moment , and
what care I to know who you are ? " -- " It rather concerns you , however , 
to know , " said the driver ,  " for I am Kühleborn . " And he grinned
hideously into the wagon--which was now a wagon no longer , nor were
the horses horses; but all dissolved into foaming waves; the wagoner
himself shot up into a giant Waterspout , bore down the struggling
horse into the flood , and , towering over the heads of the hapless
pair , till he had swelled into a watery fountain , he would have
swallowed them up the next moment . 

But now the sweet voice of Undine was heard above the wild uproar;
the moon shone out between the clouds , and at the same instant Undine
came into sight , upon the high grounds above them . She addressed
Kühleborn in a commanding tone , the huge wave laid itself down , 
muttering and murmuring; the waters rippled gently away in the moon ' s
soft light , and Undine alighted like a white dove from her airy
height , and led them to a soft green spot on the hillside , where she
refreshed their jaded spirits with choice food . She then helped
Bertalda to mount her own white palfrey , and at length they all three
reached the Castle of Ringstetten in safety . 


XV . --THE TRIP TO VIENNA

For some time after this adventure they led a quiet and peaceful life
in the castle . The Knight was deeply touched by his wife ' s angelic
goodness , so signally displayed by her pursuing and saving them in the
Black Valley , where their lives were threatened by Kühleborn . Undine
herself was happy in the peace of an approving conscience; besides
that , many a gleam of hope now brightened her path , as her husband ' s
love and confidence seemed to revive; Bertalda meanwhile was grateful , 
modest , and timid , without claiming any merit for being so . If either
of her companions alluded to the sealing up of the fountain , or the
adventures in the Black Valley , she would implore them to spare her on
those subjects , because she could not think of the fountain without a
blush , nor the valley without a shudder . She was therefore told
nothing further; indeed , what would have been the use of enlightening
her ? Nothing could add to the peace and happiness which had taken up
their abode in the Castle of Ringstetten; they enjoyed the present in
full security , and the future lay before them , all blooming with fair
fruits and flowers . 

The winter had gone by without any interruption to their social
comfort; and spring , with her young green shoots and bright blue
skies , began to smile upon men; their hearts felt light , like the
young season , and from its returning birds of passage , they caught a
fancy to travel . One day as they were walking together near the
sources of the Danube , Huldbrand fell into talk about the glories of
that noble river , how proudly he flowed on , through fruitful lands , to
the spot where the majestic city of Vienna crowned his banks , and how
every mile of his course was marked by fresh grandeur and beauty .  " How
delightful it would be to follow his course down to Vienna ! " cried
Bertalda; but instantly relapsing into her timid , chastened manner , 
she blushed and was silent . This touched Undine , and in her eagerness
to give her friend pleasure , she said:  " And why should we not take the
trip ? " Bertalda jumped for joy , and their fancy began to paint this
pleasant recreation in the brightest colours . Huldbrand encouraged
them cheerfully , but whispered once to Undine:  " But , should not we get
within Kühleborn ' s power again , down there ? " -- " Let him come , " said
she , laughing;  " I shall be with you , and in my presence he durst not
attempt any mischief . " 

So the only possible objection seemed removed and they prepared for
departure , and were soon sailing along , full of spirit and of gay
hopes . But , O Man ! it is not for thee to wonder when the course of
events differs widely from the paintings of thy fancy . The treacherous
foe , that lures us to our ruin , lulls his victim to rest with sweet
music and golden dreams . Our guardian angel , on the contrary , will
often rouse us by a sharp and awakening blow . 

The first days they spent on the Danube were days of extraordinary
enjoyment . The further they floated down the proud stream the nobler
and fairer grew the prospect . But , just as they had reached a most
lovely district , the first sight of which had promised them great
delight , the unruly Kühleborn began openly to give signs of his
presence and power . At first they were only sportive tricks , because , 
whenever he ruffled the stream and raised the wind , Undine repressed
him by a word or two , and made him again subside at once; but his
attempts soon began again , and again , Undine was obliged to warn him
off; so that the pleasure of the little party was grievously
disturbed . To make things worse , the watermen would mutter many a dark
surmise into each other ' s ears , and cast strange looks at the three
gentlefolks , whose very servants began to feel suspicion , and to show
distrust of their lord . Huldbrand said to himself more than once , 
 " This comes of uniting with other than one ' s like: a son of earth may
not marry a wondrous maid of ocean . " To justify himself  ( as we all
love to do ) he would add ,  " But I did not know she was a maid of ocean . 
If I am to be pursued and fettered wherever I go by the mad freaks of
her relations , mine is the misfortune , not the fault . " Such
reflections somewhat checked his self-reproaches; but they made him
the more disposed to accuse , nay , even to hate Undine . Already he
began to scowl upon her , and the poor wife understood but too well his
meaning . Exhausted by this , and by her constant exertions against
Kühleborn , she sank back one evening in the boat , and was lulled by
its gentle motion into a deep sleep . 

But no sooner were her eyes closed , than everyone in the boat thought
he saw , just opposite his own eyes , a terrific human head rising above
the water; not like the head of a swimmer , but planted upright on the
surface of the river , and keeping pace with the boat . Each turned to
his neighbour to show him the cause of his terror , and found him
looking equally frightened , but pointing in a different direction , 
where the half-laughing , half-scowling goblin met his eyes . When at
length they tried to explain the matter to each other , crying out , 
 " Look there; no , there ! " each of them suddenly perceived the other ' s
phantom , and the water round the boat appeared all alive with ghastly
monsters . The cry which burst from every mouth awakened Undine . Before
the light of her beaming eyes the horde of misshapen faces vanished . 
But Huldbrand was quite exasperated by these fiendish tricks and would
have burst into loud imprecations , had not Undine whispered in the
most beseeching manner ,  " For God ' s sake , my own lord , be patient now;
remember we are on the water . " The Knight kept down his anger , and
soon sank into thought . Presently Undine whispered to him:  " My love , 
had not we better give up the foolish journey , and go home to
Ringstetten in comfort ? " But Huldbrand muttered angrily ,  " Then I am to
be kept a prisoner in my own castle ? and even there I may not breathe
freely unless the fountain is sealed up ? Would to Heaven the absurd
connection " --But Undine pressed her soft hand gently upon his lips . 
And he held his peace , and mused upon all she had previously told him . 

In the meantime , Bertalda had yielded herself up to many and strange
reflections . She knew something of Undine ' s origin , but not all ! and
Kühleborn in particular was only a fearful but vague image in her
mind; she had not even once heard his name . And as she pondered these
wonderful subjects , she half unconsciously took off a golden necklace
which Huldbrand had bought for her of a travelling jeweller a few days
before; she held it close to the surface of the river playing with
it , and dreamily watching the golden gleam that it shed on the glassy
water . Suddenly a large hand came up out of the Danube , snatched the
necklace , and ducked under with it . Bertalda screamed aloud , and was
answered by a laugh of scorn from the depths below . And now the Knight
could contain himself no longer . Starting up , he gave loose to his
fury , loading with imprecations those who chose to break into his
family and private life , and challenging them--were they goblins or
sirens--to meet his good sword . Bertalda continued to weep over the
loss of her beloved jewel , and her tears were as oil to the flames of
his wrath , while Undine kept her hand dipped into the water with a
ceaseless low murmur , only once or twice interrupting her mysterious
whispers to say to her husband in tones of entreaty ,  " Dearest love , 
speak not roughly to me here; say whatever you will , only spare me
here; you know why ! " and he still restrained his tongue  ( which
stammered with passion ) from saying a word directly against her . She
soon drew her hand from under the water , bringing up a beautiful coral
necklace whose glitter dazzled them all .  " Take it , " said she , offering
it kindly to Bertalda;  " I have sent for this , instead of the one you
lost; do not grieve any more , my poor child . " But Huldbrand darted
forward , snatched the shining gift from Undine ' s hand , hurled it again
into the water , and roared furiously ,  " So you still have intercourse
with them ? In the name of sorcery , go back to them with all your
baubles , and leave us men in peace , witch as you are ! " With eyes
aghast , yet streaming with tears , poor Undine gazed at him , still
holding out the hand which had so lovingly presented to Bertalda the
bright jewel . Then she wept more and more , like a sorely injured , 
innocent child . And at length she said faintly ,  " Farewell , my dearest;
farewell ! They shall not lay a finger on thee; only be true to me , 
that I may still guard thee from them . But I , alas ! I must be gone;
all this bright morning of life is over . Woe , woe is me ! what hast
thou done ? woe , woe ! " And she slipped out of the boat and passed away . 
Whether she went down into the river , or flowed away with it , none
could tell; it was like both and yet like neither . She soon mingled
with the waters of the Danube , and nothing was to be heard but the
sobbing whispers of the stream as it washed against the boat , seeming
to say distinctly ,  " Woe , woe ! Oh be true to me ! woe , woe ! " 

Huldbrand lay flat in the boat , drowned in tears , till a deep swoon
came to the unhappy man ' s relief , and steeped him in oblivion . 


XVI . --OF WHAT BEFELL HULDBRAND AFTERWARDS

Shall we say , Alas , or thank God , that our grief is so often
transient ? I speak of such grief as has its source in the wellsprings
of life itself , and seems so identified with our lost friend , as
almost to fill up the void he has left; and his hallowed image seems
fixed within the sanctuary of our soul , until the signal of our
release comes , and sets us free to join him ! In truth , a good man will
not suffer this sanctuary to be disturbed; yet even with him , it is
not the first , the all-engrossing sorrow which abides . New objects
will intermingle , and we are compelled to draw from our grief itself a
fresh proof of the perishableness of earthly things: alas , then , that
our grief is transient ! 

So it was with the Lord of Ringstetten; whether for his weal or woe , 
the sequel of this story will show us . At first , he could do nothing
but weep abundantly , as his poor kind Undine had wept when he snatched
from her the beautiful gift , which she thought would have comforted
and pleased them so much . He would then stretch out his hand as she
had done , and burst into tears afresh , like her . He secretly hoped
that he might end by altogether dissolving in tears: and are there not
many whose minds have been visited by the same painfully pleasing
thought , at some season of great sorrow ? Bertalda wept with him , and
they lived quietly together at Ringstetten a long while , cherishing
the memory of Undine , and seeming to have forgotten their own previous
attachment . Moreover , the gentle Undine often appeared to Huldbrand in
his dreams; she would caress him meekly and fondly , and depart again
with tearful resignation , so that when he awoke , he doubted whose
tears they were that bedewed his face--were they hers , or only his
own ? 

But as time went on these visions became less frequent , and the
Knight ' s grief milder; still he might perhaps have spent the rest of
his days contentedly , devoting himself to the memory of Undine , and
keeping it alive by talking of her , had not the old Fisherman
unexpectedly made his appearance , and laid his serious commands upon
Bertalda , his daughter , to return home with him . The news of Undine ' s
disappearance had reached him , and he would no longer suffer Bertalda
to remain in the castle alone with its lord .  " I do not ask whether my
daughter cares for me or not , " said he;  " her character is at stake , 
and where that is the case , nothing else is worth considering . " 

This summons from the old man , and the prospect of utter loneliness
amid the halls and long galleries of the castle after Bertalda ' s
departure , revived in Huldbrand ' s heart the feeling that had lain
dormant , and as it were buried under his mourning for Undine , namely , 
his love for the fair Bertalda . The Fisherman had many objections to
their marriage; Undine had been very dear to the old man and he
thought it hardly certain yet that his lost darling was really dead . 
But , if her corpse were indeed lying stiff and cold in the bed of the
Danube , or floating down its stream to the distant ocean , then
Bertalda ought to reproach herself for her death , and it ill became
her to take the place of her poor victim . However , the Fisherman was
very fond of Huldbrand also; the entreaties of his daughter , who was
now grown much more gentle and submissive , had their effect , and it
seems that he did yield his consent at last; for he remained peaceably
at the castle , and an express was sent for Father Heilmann , who in
earlier , happier days had blessed Undine ' s and Huldbrand ' s union , that
he might officiate at the Knight ' s second marriage . 

No sooner had the holy man read the Lord of Ringstetten ' s letter than
he set forth on his way thither , with far greater speed than the
messenger had used to reach him . If his straining haste took away his
breath , or he felt his aged limbs ache with fatigue , he would say to
himself:  " I may be in time to prevent a wicked deed; sink not till
thou hast reached the goal , my withered frame ! " And so he exerted
himself afresh , and pushed on , without flagging or halting , till late
one evening he entered the shady court of Ringstetten . 

The lovers were sitting hand in hand under a tree , with the thoughtful
old man near them; as soon as they saw Father Heilmann , they rose
eagerly and advanced to meet him . But he , scarcely noticing their
civilities , begged the Knight to come with him into the castle . As he
stared at this request , and hesitated to comply , the pious old Priest
said ,  " Why , indeed , should I speak to you alone , my Lord of
Ringstetten ? What I have to say equally concerns the Fisherman and
Bertalda; and as they must sooner or later know it , it had better be
said now . How can you be certain , Lord Huldbrand , that your own wife
is indeed dead ? For myself , I can hardly think so . I will not venture
to speak of things relating to her wondrous nature; in truth I have
no clear knowledge about it . But a godly and faithful wife she proved
herself , beyond all about . And these fourteen nights has she come to
my bedside in dreams , wringing her poor hands in anguish , and sighing
out ,  ' Oh stop him , dear father ! I am yet alive ! Oh save his life ! Oh
save his soul ! ' I understood not the meaning of the vision till your
messenger came; and I have now hastened hither , not to join but to
part those hands , which may not be united in holy wedlock . Part from
her , Huldbrand ! Part from him , Bertalda ! He belongs to another; see
you not how his cheek turns pale at the thought of his departed wife ? 
Those are not the looks of a bridegroom , and the spirit tells me this . 
If thou leavest him not now , there is joy for thee no more . " They all
three felt at the bottom of their hearts that Father Heilmann ' s words
were true but they would not yield to them . Even the old Fisherman was
so blinded as to think that what had been settled between them for so
many days , could not now be relinquished . So they resisted the
Priest ' s warnings , and urged the fulfilment of their wishes with
headlong , gloomy determination , till Father Heilmann departed with a
melancholy shake of the head , without accepting even for one night
their proffered hospitalities , or tasting any of the refreshments they
set before him . But Huldbrand persuaded himself that the old Priest
was a weak dotard; and early next morning he sent to a monk from the
nearest cloister , who readily promised to come and marry them in a few
days . 


XVII . --THE KNIGHT ' S DREAM

The morning twilight was beginning to dawn , and the Knight lay
half-awake on his couch . Whenever he dropped asleep he was scared by
mysterious terrors , and started up as if sleep were peopled by
phantoms . If he woke up in earnest , he felt himself fanned all around
by what seemed like swans ' wings , and soothed by watery airs , which
lulled him back again into the half-unconscious , twilight state . At
length he did fall asleep and fancied himself lifted by swans on their
soft wings , and carried far away over lands and seas , all to the sound
of their sweetest melody .  " Swans singing ! swans singing ! " thought he
continually;  " is not that the strain of Death ? " Presently he found
himself hovering above a vast sea . A swan warbled in his ear that it
was the Mediterranean; and as he looked down into the deep it became
like clear crystal , transparent to the bottom . This rejoiced him much , 
for he could see Undine sitting in a brilliant hall of crystal . 

She was shedding tears , indeed , and looked sadly changed since the
happy times which they had spent together at Ringstetten; happiest at
first , but happy also a short time since , just before the fatal sail
on the Danube . The contrast struck Huldbrand deeply; but Undine did
not seem to be aware of his presence . Kühleborn soon came up to her , 
and began rating her for weeping . She composed herself , and looked at
him with a firmness and dignity , before which he almost quailed . 
 " Though I am condemned to live under these deep waters , " said she ,  " I
have brought my soul with me; therefore my tears cannot be understood
by thee . But to me they are blessings , like everything that belongs to
a loving soul . " He shook his head incredulously , and said , after a
pause:  " Nevertheless , niece , you are still subject to the laws of our
element; and you know you must execute sentence of death upon him as
soon as he marries again , and breaks faith with you . " -- " To this hour
he is a widower , " said Undine ,  " and loves and mourns me truly . " -- " Ah , 
but he will be bridegroom soon , " said Kühleborn with a sneer;  " wait a
couple of days only; and the marriage blessing will have been given , 
and you must go up and put the criminal to death . " -- " I cannot ! " 
answered the smiling Undine .  " I have had the fountain sealed up , 
against myself and my whole race . "  " But suppose he leaves his castle , " 
said Kühleborn ,  " or forgets himself so far as to let them set the
fountain  ' free , ' for he thinks mighty little of those matters . " -- " And
that is why , " said Undine , still smiling through her tears ,  " that is
why his spirit hovers at this moment over the Mediterranean , and
listens to our conversation as in a dream . I have contrived it on
purpose , that he may take warning . " On hearing this Kühleborn looked
up angrily at the Knight , scowled at him , stamped , and then shot
upward through the waves like an arrow . His fury seemed to make him
expand into a whale . Again the swans began to warble , to wave their
wings , and to fly; the Knight felt himself borne high over alps and
rivers , till he was deposited in the Castle of Ringstetten , and awoke
in his bed . 

He did awake in his bed , just as one of his squires entered the room , 
and told him that Father Heilmann was still lingering near the castle;
for he had found him the evening before in the forest , living in a
shed he had made for himself with branches and moss . On being asked
what he was staying for since he had refused to bless the betrothed
couple ? He answered ,  " It is not the wedded only who stand in need of
prayer , and though I came not for the bridal , there may yet be work
for me of another kind . We must be prepared for everything . Sometimes
marriage and mourning are not so far apart; and he who does not
wilfully close his eyes may perceive it . " The Knight built all manner
of strange conjectures upon these words , and upon his dream . But if
once a man has formed a settled purpose , it is hard indeed to shake
it . The end of this was , that their plans remained unchanged . 


XVIII . --OF THE KNIGHT HULDBRAND ' S SECOND BRIDAL

Were I to tell you how the wedding-day at Ringstetten passed , you
might imagine yourself contemplating a glittering heap of gay objects , 
with a black crape thrown over them , through which the splendid
pageant , instead of delighting the eye , would look like a mockery of
all earthly joys . Not that the festive meeting was disturbed by any
spectral apparitions: we have seen that the castle was safe from any
intrusion of the malicious water-sprites . But the Knight , the
Fisherman , and all the guests were haunted by a feeling that the chief
person , the soul of the feast , was missing; and who was she but the
gentle , beloved Undine ? As often as they heard a door open , every eye
turned involuntarily toward it , and when nothing ensued but the
entrance of the steward with some more dishes , or of the cupbearer
with a fresh supply of rich wine , the guests would look sad and blank , 
and the sparks of gayety kindled by the light jest or the cheerful
discourse , were quenched in the damp of melancholy recollections . The
bride was the most thoughtless , and consequently the most cheerful
person present; but even she , at moments , felt it unnatural to be
sitting at the head of the table , decked out in her wreath of green
and her embroidery of gold , while Undine ' s corpse was lying cold and
stiff in the bed of the Danube , or floating down its stream to the
ocean . For , ever since her father had used these words , they had been
ringing in her ears , and to-day especially they pursued her without
ceasing . 

The party broke up before night had closed in; not , as usual , 
dispersed by the eager impatience of the bridegroom to be alone with
his bride; but dropping off listlessly , as a general gloom spread over
the assembly; Bertalda was followed to her dressing-room by her women
only , and the Knight by his pages . At this gloomy feast , there was no
question of the gay and sportive train of bridesmaids and young men , 
who usually attend the wedded pair . 

Bertalda tried to call up brighter thoughts; she bade her women
display before her a splendid set of jewels , the gift of Huldbrand , 
together with her richest robes and veils , that she might select the
gayest and handsomest dress for the morrow . Her maids seized the
opportunity of wishing their young mistress all manner of joy , nor did
they fail to extol the beauty of the bride to the skies . Bertalda , 
however , glanced at herself in the glass , and sighed:  " Ah , but look at
the freckles just here , on my throat ! " They looked and found it was
indeed so , but called them beauty spots that would only enhance the
fairness of her delicate skin . Bertalda shook her head , and replied , 
 " Still it is a blemish , and I once might have cured it ! " said she with
a deep sigh .  " But the fountain in the court is stopped up--that
fountain which used to supply me with precious , beautifying water . If
I could but get one jugful to-day ! " -- " Is that all ? " cried an
obsequious attendant , and slipped out of the room .  " Why , she will not
be so mad , " asked Bertalda in a tone of complacent surprise ,  " as to
make them raise the stone this very night ? " And now she heard men ' s
footsteps crossing the court; and on looking down from her window , she
saw the officious handmaid conducting them straight to the fountain;
they carried levers and other tools upon their shoulders .  " Well , it
is my will to be sure , " said Bertalda , smiling ,  " provided they are not
too long about it . " And , elated by the thought that a hint from her
could now effect what had once been denied to her entreaties , she
watched the progress of the work in the moonlit court below . 

The men began straining themselves to lift the huge stone;
occasionally a sigh was heard , as someone recollected that they were
now reversing their dear lady ' s commands . But the task proved lighter
than they had expected . Some power from beneath seemed to second their
efforts , and help the stone upward .  " Why ! " said the astonished workmen
to each other ,  " it feels as if the spring below had turned into a
waterspout . " More and more did the stone heave , till , without any
impulse from the men it rolled heavily along the pavement with a
hollow sound . But , from the mouth of the spring arose , slowly and
solemnly , what looked like a column of water; at first they thought
so , but presently saw that it was no waterspout , but the figure of a
pale woman , veiled in white . She was weeping abundantly , wringing her
hands and clasping them over her head , while she proceeded with slow
and measured step toward the castle . The crowd of servants fell back
from the spot; while , pale and aghast , the bride and her women looked
on from the window . 

When the figure had arrived just under that window , she raised her
tearful face for a moment , and Bertalda thought she recognised
Undine ' s pale features through the veil . The shadowy form moved on
slowly and reluctantly , like one sent to execution . Bertalda screamed
out that the Knight must be called; no one durst stir a foot , and the
bride herself kept silence , frightened at the sound of her own voice . 

While these remained at the window , as if rooted to the spot , the
mysterious visitor had entered the castle , and passed up the
well-known stairs , and through the familiar rooms , still weeping
silently . Alas ! how differently had she trodden those floors in days
gone by ! 

The Knight had now dismissed his train; half-undressed , and in a
dejected mood , he was standing near a large mirror , by the light of a
dim taper . He heard the door tapped by a soft , soft touch . It was thus
Undine had been wont to knock , when she meant to steal upon him
playfully .  " It is all fancy ! " thought he .  " The bridal bed awaits
me . " -- " Yes , but it is a cold one , " said a weeping voice from without;
and the mirror then showed him the door opening slowly , and the white
form coming in , and closing the door gently behind her .  " They have
opened the mouth of the spring , " murmured she;  " and now I am come , and
now must thou die . " His beating heart told him this was indeed true;
but he pressed his hands over his eyes , and said:  " Do not bewilder me
with terror in my last moments . If thy veil conceals the features of a
spectre , hide them from me still , and let me die in peace . " -- " Alas ! " 
rejoined the forlorn one ,  " wilt thou not look upon me once again ? I am
fair , as when thou didst woo me on the promontory . " -- " Oh , could that
be true ! " sighed Huldbrand ,  " and if I might die in thy embrace ! " -- " Be
it so , my dearest , " said she . And she raised her veil , and the
heavenly radiance of her sweet countenance beamed upon him . 

Trembling , at once with love and awe , the Knight approached her; she
received him with a tender embrace; but instead of relaxing her hold , 
she pressed him more closely to her heart , and wept as if her soul
would pour itself out . Drowned in her tears and his own , Huldbrand
felt his heart sink within him , and at last he fell lifeless from the
fond arms of Undine upon his pillow . 

 " I have wept him to death ! " said she to the pages , whom she passed in
the ante-chamber; and she glided slowly through the crowd , and went
back to the fountain . 


XIX . --HOW THE KNIGHT HULDBRAND WAS INTERRED

Father Heilmann had returned to the castle , as soon as he heard of the
Lord of Ringstetten ' s death , and he appeared there just after the
monk , who had married the hapless pair , had fled full of alarm and
horror .  " It is well , " answered Heilmann , when told this:  " now is the
time for my office; I want no assistant . " He addressed spiritual
exhortations to the widowed bride , but little impression could be made
on so worldly and thoughtless a mind . The old Fisherman , although
grieved to the heart , resigned himself more readily to the awful
dispensation; and when Bertalda kept calling Undine a witch and a
murderer , the old man calmly answered:  " The stroke could not be turned
away . For my part , I see only the hand of God therein; and none
grieved more deeply over Huldbrand ' s sentence , than she who was doomed
to inflict it , the poor forsaken Undine ! " And he helped to arrange the
funeral ceremonies in a manner suitable to the high rank of the dead . 
He was to be buried in a neighbouring hamlet , whose churchyard
contained the graves of all his ancestors , and which he had himself
enriched with many noble gifts . His helmet and coat of arms lay upon
the coffin , about to be lowered into earth with his mortal remains;
for Lord Huldbrand of Ringstetten was the last of his race . 

The mourners began their dismal procession , and the sound of their
solemn dirge rose into the calm blue depths of heaven . Heilmann walked
first , bearing on high a crucifix , and the bereaved Bertalda followed
leaning on her aged father . Suddenly , amid the crowd of mourners who
composed the widow ' s train , appeared a snow-white figure , deeply
veiled , with hands uplifted in an attitude of intense grief . Those
that stood near her felt a shudder creep over them; they shrank back , 
and thus increased the alarm of those whom the stranger next
approached , so that confusion gradually spread itself through the
whole train . Here and there was to be found a soldier bold enough to
address the figure , and attempt to drive her away; but she always
eluded their grasp , and the next moment reappeared among the rest , 
moving along with slow and solemn step . At length , when the attendants
had all fallen back , she found herself close behind Bertalda , and now
slackened her pace to the very slowest measure , so that the widow was
not aware of her presence . No one disturbed her again , while she
meekly and reverently glided on behind her . 

So they advanced till they reached the churchyard , when the whole
procession formed a circle round the open grave . Bertalda then
discovered the unbidden guest , and half-angry , half-frightened , she
forbade her to come near the Knight ' s resting-place . But the veiled
form gently shook her head , and extended her hands in humble entreaty;
this gesture reminded Bertalda of poor Undine , when she gave her the
coral necklace on the Danube , and she could not but weep . Father
Heilmann enjoined silence; for they had begun to heap earth over the
grave , and were about to offer up solemn prayers around it . Bertalda
knelt down in silence , and all her followers did the same . When they
rose , lo , the white form had vanished ! and on the spot where she had
knelt , a bright silvery brook now gushed out of the turf , and flowed
round the Knight ' s tomb , till it had almost wholly encircled it; then
it ran further on , and emptied itself into a shady pool which bounded
one side of the churchyard . From that time forth , the villagers are
said to have shown travellers this clear spring , and they still
believe it to be the poor forsaken Undine , who continues thus to twine
her arms round her beloved lord . 


