Sir--Agreeably to my promise , I now relate to you all the particulars
of the lost man and child which I have been able to collect . It is
entirely owing to the humane interest you seemed to take in the
report , that I have pursued the inquiry to the following result . 

You may remember that business called me to Boston in the summer of
1820 . I sailed in the packet to Providence , and when I arrived there I
learned that every seat in the stage was engaged . I was thus obliged
either to wait a few hours or accept a seat with the driver , who
civilly offered me that accommodation . Accordingly I took my seat by
his side , and soon found him intelligent and communicative . 

When we had travelled about ten miles , the horses suddenly threw their
ears on their necks , as flat as a hare ' s . Said the driver ,  " Have you a
surtout with you ? "  " No , " said I;  " why do you ask ? "  " You will want one
soon , " said he;  " do you observe the ears of all the horses ? "  " Yes , and
was just about to ask the reason . "  " They see the storm-breeder , and we
shall see him soon . " At this moment there was not a cloud visible in
the firmament . Soon after a small speck appeared in the road .  " There , " 
said my companion ,  " comes the storm-breeder; he always leaves a Scotch
mist behind him . By many a wet jacket do I remember him . I suppose the
poor fellow suffers much himself , much more than is known to the
world . " Presently a man with a child beside him , with a large black
horse , and a weather-beaten chair , once built for a chaise body , 
passed in great haste , apparently at the rate of twelve miles an hour . 
He seemed to grasp the reins of his horse with firmness , and appeared
to anticipate his speed . He seemed dejected , and looked anxiously at
the passengers , particularly at the stage-driver and myself . In a
moment after he passed us , the horses ' ears were up and bent
themselves forward so that they nearly met .  " Who is that man ? " said I;
 " he seems in great trouble . "  " Nobody knows who is he , but his person
and the child are familiar to me . I have met them more than a hundred
times , and have been so often asked the way to Boston by that man , 
even when he was travelling directly from that town , that of late I
have refused any communication with him , and that is the reason he
gave me such a fixed look . "  " But does he never stop anywhere ? "  " I have
never known him to stop anywhere longer than to inquire the way to
Boston; and , let him be where he may , he will tell you he cannot stay
a moment , for he must reach Boston that night . " 

We were now ascending a high hill in Walpole , and as we had a fair
view of the heavens , I was rather disposed to jeer the driver for
thinking of his surtout , as not a cloud as big as a marble could be
discerned .  " Do you look , " said he ,  " in the direction whence the man
came , that is the place to look; the storm never meets him , it follows
him . " We presently approached another hill , and when at the height , 
the driver pointed out in an eastern direction a little black speck as
big as a hat .  " There , " said he ,  " is the seed storm; we may possibly
reach Polley ' s before it reaches us , but the wanderer and his child
will go to Providence through rain , thunder , and lightning . " And now
the horses , as though taught by instinct , hastened with increased
speed . The little black cloud came on rolling over the turnpike , and
doubled and trebled itself in all directions . The appearance of this
cloud attracted the notice of all the passengers; for after it had
spread itself to a great bulk , it suddenly became more limited in
circumference , grew more compact , dark , and consolidated . And now the
successive flashes of chain lightning caused the whole cloud to appear
like a sort of irregular network , and displayed a thousand fantastic
images . The driver bespoke my attention to a remarkable configuration
in the cloud; he said every flash of lightning near its centre
discovered to him distinctly the form of a man sitting in an open
carriage drawn by a black horse . But in truth I saw no such thing . The
man ' s fancy was doubtless at fault . It is a very common thing for the
imagination to paint for the senses , both in the visible and invisible
world . 

In the meantime the distant thunder gave notice of a shower at hand , 
and just as we reached Polley ' s tavern the rain poured down in
torrents . It was soon over , the cloud passing in the direction of the
turnpike toward Providence . In a few moments after , a
respectable-looking man in a chaise stopped at the door . The man and
child in the chair having excited some little sympathy among the
passengers , the gentleman was asked if he had observed them . He said
he had met them; that the man seemed bewildered , and inquired the way
to Boston; that he was driving at great speed , as though he expected
to outstrip the tempest; that the moment he had passed him a
thunderclap broke distinctly over the man ' s head and seemed to envelop
both man and child , horse and carriage .  " I stopped , " said the
gentleman ,  " supposing the lightning had struck him , but the horse only
seemed to loom up and increase his speed , and , as well as I could
judge , he travelled just as fast as the thunder cloud . " While this
man was speaking , a peddler with a cart of tin merchandise came up , 
all dripping; and , on being questioned , he said he had met that man
and carriage , within a fortnight , in four different States; that at
each time he had inquired the way to Boston; and that a thunder shower
like the present had each time deluged him , his wagon and his wares , 
setting his tin pots , etc . , afloat , so that he had determined to get
marine insurance done for the future . But that which excited his
surprise most was the strange conduct of his horse , for that , long
before he could distinguish the man in the chair , his own horse stood
still in the road and flung back his ears .  " In short , " said the
peddler ,  " I wish never to see that man and horse again; they do not
look to me as if they belonged to this world . " 

This is all that I could learn at that time; and the occurrence soon
after would have become with me like one of those things which had
never happened , had I not , as I stood recently on the doorstep of
Bennett ' s Hotel in Hartford , heard a man say ,  " There goes Peter Rugg
and his child ! he looks wet and weary , and farther from Boston than
ever . " I was satisfied it was the same man that I had seen more than
three years before; for whoever has once seen Peter Rugg can never
after be deceived as to his identity .  " Peter Rugg ! " said I ,  " and who
is Peter Rugg ? "  " That , " said the stranger ,  " is more than anyone can
tell exactly . He is a famous traveller , held in light esteem by all
inn-holders , for he never stops to eat , drink , or sleep . I wonder why
the Government does not employ him to carry the mail . "  " Ay , " said a
bystander ,  " that is a thought bright only on one side . How long would
it take , in that case , to send a letter to Boston ? For Peter has
already , to my knowledge , been more than twenty years travelling to
that place . "  " But , " said I ,  " does the man never stop anywhere , does
he never converse with anyone ? I saw the same man more than three
years since , near Providence , and I heard a strange story about him . 
Pray , sir , give me some account of this man . "  " Sir , " said the
stranger ,  " those who know the most respecting that man say the least . 
I have heard it asserted that heaven sometimes sets a mark on a man , 
either for judgment or trial . Under which Peter Rugg now labours I
cannot say; therefore I am rather inclined to pity than to judge . " 
 " You speak like a humane man , " said I ,  " and if you have known him so
long , I pray you will give me some account of him . Has his appearance
much altered in that time ? "  " Why , yes; he looks as though he never
ate , drank , or slept; and his child looks older than himself; and he
looks like time broke off from eternity and anxious to gain a
resting-place . "  " And how does his horse look ? " said I .  " As for his
horse , he looks fatter and gayer , and shows more animation and
courage , than he did twenty years ago . The last time Rugg spoke to me
he inquired how far it was to Boston . I told him just one hundred
miles .  ' Why , ' said he ,  ' how can you deceive me so ? It is cruel to
deceive a traveller . I have lost my way . Pray direct me the nearest
way to Boston . ' I repeated it was one hundred miles .  ' How can you say
so ? ' said he .  ' I was told last evening it was but fifty , and I have
travelled all night . '  ' But , ' said I ,  ' you are now travelling from
Boston . You must turn back . '  ' Alas ! ' said he ,  ' it is all turn back ! 
Boston shifts with the wind , and plays all around the compass . One man
tells me it is to the east , another to the west; and the guide-posts , 
too , they all point the wrong way . '  ' But will you not stop and rest ? ' 
said I;  ' you seem wet and weary . '  ' Yes , ' said he ,  ' it has been foul
weather since I left home . '  ' Stop , then , and refresh yourself . '  ' I
must not stop , I must reach home to-night , if possible , though I
think you must be mistaken in the distance to Boston . ' He then gave
the reins to his horse , which he restrained with difficulty , and
disappeared in a moment . A few days afterwards I met the man a little
this side of Claremont , winding around the hills in Unity , at the
rate , I believe , of twenty miles an hour . " 

 " Is Peter Rugg his real name , or has he accidentally gained that
name ? "  " I know not , but presume he will not deny his name; you can ask
him , for see , he has turned his horse and is passing this way . " In a
moment a dark-coloured , high-spirited horse approached , and would have
passed without stopping , but I had resolved to speak to Peter Rugg , or
whoever the man might be . Accordingly . I stepped into the street , and
as the horse approached I made a feint of stopping him . The man
immediately reined in his horse .  " Sir , " said I ,  " may I be so bold as
to inquire if you are not Mr . Rugg ? for I think I have seen you
before . "  " My name is Peter Rugg , " said he;  " I have unfortunately lost
my way; I am wet and weary , and will take it kindly of you to direct
me to Boston . "  " You live in Boston , do you , and in what street ? "  " In
Middle Street . "  " When did you leave Boston ? "  " I cannot tell precisely;
it seems a considerable time . "  " But how did you and your child become
so wet ? it has not rained here to-day . "  " It has just rained a heavy
shower up the river . But I shall not reach Boston to-night if I tarry . 
Would you advise me to take the old road , or the turnpike ? "  " Why , the
old road is one hundred and seventeen miles , and the turnpike is
ninety-seven . "  " How can you say so ? you impose on me; it is wrong to
trifle with a traveller; you know it is but forty miles from
Newburyport to Boston . "  " But this is not Newburyport; this is
Hartford . "  " Do not deceive me , sir . Is not this town Newburyport , and
the river that I have been following the Merrimac ? "  " No , sir; this is
Hartford , and the river the Connecticut . " He wrung his hands and
looked incredulous .  " Have the rivers , too , changed their courses as
the cities have changed places ? But see , the clouds are gathering in
the south , and we shall have a rainy night . Ah , that fatal oath ! " He
would tarry no longer . His impatient horse leaped off , his hind flanks
rising like wings--he seemed to devour all before him and to scorn all
behind . 

I had now , as I thought , discovered a clue to the history of Peter
Rugg , and I determined , the next time my business called me to Boston , 
to make a further inquiry . Soon after I was enabled to collect the
following particulars from Mrs . Croft , an aged lady in Middle Street , 
who has resided in Boston during the last twenty years . Her narration
is this: The last summer a person , just at twilight , stopped at the
door of the late Mrs . Rugg . Mrs . Croft , on coming to the door , 
perceived a stranger , with a child by his side , in an old , 
weather-beaten carriage , with a black horse . The stranger asked for
Mrs . Rugg , and was informed that Mrs . Rugg had died , at a good old
age , more than twenty years before that time . The stranger replied , 
 " How can you deceive me so ? do ask Mrs . Rugg to step to the door . " 
 " Sir , I assure you Mrs . Rugg has not lived here these nineteen years;
no one lives here but myself , and my name is Betsey Croft . " The
stranger paused , and looked up and down the street and said ,  " Though
the painting is rather faded , this looks like my house . "  " Yes , " said
the child ,  " that is the stone before the door that I used to sit on to
eat my bread and milk . "  " But , " said the stranger ,  " it seems to be on
the wrong side of the street . Indeed , everything here seems to be
misplaced . The streets are all changed , the people are all changed , 
the town seems changed , and , what is strangest of all , Catharine Rugg
has deserted her husband and child . "  " Pray , " said the stranger ,  " has
John Foy come home from sea ? He went a long voyage; he is my kinsman . 
If I could see him , he could give me some account of Mrs . Rugg . " 
 " Sir , " said Mrs . Croft ,  " I never heard of John Foy . Where did he
live ? "  " Just above here , in Orange-Tree Lane . "  " There is no such place
in this neighbourhood . "  " What do you tell me ! Are the streets gone ? 
Orange-Tree Lane is at the head of Hanover Street , near Pemberton ' s
Hill . "  " There is no such lane now . "  " Madam ! you cannot be serious . But
you doubtless know my brother , William Rugg . He lives in Royal
Exchange Lane , near King Street . "  " I know of no such lane; and I I am
sure there is no such street as King Street in this town . "  " No such
street as King Street ? Why , woman ! you mock me . You may as well tell
me there is no King George . However , madam , you see I am wet and
weary . I must find a resting place . I will go to Hart ' s tavern , near
the market . "  " Which market , sir ? for you seem perplexed; we have
several markets . "  " You know there is but one market , near the town
dock . "  " Oh , the old market . But no such man as Hart has kept there
these twenty years . " 

Here the stranger seemed disconcerted , and muttered to himself quite
audibly:  " Strange mistake ! How much this looks like the town of
Boston ! It certainly has a great resemblance to it; but I perceive my
mistake now . Some other Mrs . Rugg , some other Middle Street . " Then
said he ,  " Madam , can you direct me to Boston ? "  " Why , this is Boston , 
the city of Boston . I know of no other Boston . "  " City of Boston it may
be , but it is not the Boston where I live . I recollect now , I came
over a bridge instead of a ferry . Pray what bridge is that I just came
over ? "  " It is Charles River Bridge . "  " I perceive my mistake; there is
a ferry between Boston and Charlestown , there is no bridge . Ah , I
perceive my mistake . If I was in Boston , my horse would carry me
directly to my own door . But my horse shows by his impatience that he
is in a strange place . Absurd , that I should have mistaken this place
for the old town of Boston ! It is a much finer city than the town of
Boston . It has been built long since Boston . I fancy Boston must lie
at a distance from this city , as the good woman seems ignorant of it . " 
At these words his horse began to chafe , and strike the pavement with
his fore feet; the stranger seemed a little bewildered , and said  " No
home to-night , " and , giving the reins to his horse , passed up the
street , and I saw no more of him . 

It was evident that the generation to which Peter Rugg belonged had
passed away . 

This was all the account of Peter Rugg I could obtain from Mrs . Croft;
but she directed me to an elderly man , Mr . James Felt , who lived near
her , and who had kept a record of the principal occurrences for the
last fifty years . At my request she sent for him; and , after I had
related to him the object of my inquiry , Mr . Felt told me he had known
Rugg in his youth; that his disappearance had caused some surprise;
but as it sometimes happens that men run away , sometimes to be rid of
others , and sometimes to be rid of themselves; and as Rugg took his
child with him , and his own horse and chair; and as it did not appear
that any creditors made a stir , the occurrence soon mingled itself in
the stream of oblivion; and Rugg and his child , horse and chair , were
soon forgotten .  " It is true , " said Mr . Felt ,  " sundry stories grew out
of Rugg ' s affair , whether true or false I cannot tell; but stranger
things have happened in my day , without even a newspaper notice . " 
 " Sir , " said I ,  " Peter Rugg is now living . I have lately seen Peter
Rugg and his child , horse and chair; therefore I pray you to relate to
me all you know or ever heard of him . "  " Why , my friend , " said James
Felt ,  " that Peter Rugg is now a living man I will not deny; but that
you have seen Peter Rugg and his child is impossible , if you mean a
small child , for Jenny Rugg , if living , must be at least--let me
see--Boston Massacre , 1770--Jenny Rugg was about ten years old . Why , 
sir , Jenny Rugg if living must be more than sixty years of age . That
Peter Rugg is living is highly probable , as he was only ten years
older than myself; and I was only eighty last March , and I am as
likely to live twenty years longer as any man . " Here I perceived that
Mr . Felt was in his dotage , and I despaired of gaining any
intelligence from him on which I could depend . 

I took my leave of Mrs . Croft , and proceeded to my lodgings at the
Marlborough Hotel . 

If Peter Rugg , thought I , has been travelling since the Boston
Massacre , there is no reason why he should not travel to the end of
time . If the present generation know little of him , the next will know
less , and Peter and his child will have no hold on this world . 

In the course of the evening I related my adventure in Middle Street . 
 " Ha ! " said one of the company , smiling ,  " do you really think you have
seen Peter Rugg ? I have heard my grandfather speak of him as though he
seriously believed his own story . "  " Sir , " said I ,  " pray let us compare
your grandfather ' s story of Mr . Rugg with my own . "  " Peter Rugg , sir , 
if my grandfather was worthy of credit , once lived in Middle Street , 
in this city . He was a man in comfortable circumstances , had a wife
and one daughter , and was generally esteemed for his sober life and
manners . But unhappily his temper at times was altogether
ungovernable , and then his language was terrible . In these fits of
passion , if a door stood in his way he would never do less than kick a
panel through . He would sometimes throw his heels over his head , and
come down on his feet , uttering oaths in a circle . And thus , in a
rage , he was the first who performed a somerset , and did what others
have since learned to do for merriment and money . Once Rugg was seen
to bite a tenpenny nail in halves . In those days everybody , both men
and boys , wore wigs; and Peter , at these moments of violent passion , 
would become so profane that his wig would rise up from his head . Some
said it was on account of his terrible language; others accounted for
it in a more philosophical way , and said it was caused by the
expansion of his scalp , as violent passion , we know , will swell the
veins and expand the head . While these fits were on him , Rugg had no
respect for heaven or earth . Except this infirmity , all agreed that
Rugg was a good soft of a man; for when his fits were over , nobody was
so ready to commend a placid temper as Peter . 

 " It was late in autumn , one morning , that Rugg , in his own chair , with
a fine large bay horse , took his daughter and proceeded to Concord . On
his return a violent storm overtook him . At dark he stopped in
Menotomy  ( now West Cambridge ) , at the door of a Mr . Cutter , a friend
of his , who urged him to tarry overnight . On Rugg ' s declining to stop , 
Mr . Cutter urged him vehemently .  ' Why , Mr . Rugg , ' said Cutter ,  ' the
storm is overwhelming you; the night is exceeding dark; your little
daughter will perish; you are in an open chair , and the tempest is
increasing . '  ' _Let the storm increase_ , ' said Rugg , with a fearful
oath ,  ' _I will see home to-night , in spite of the last tempest ! or may
I never see home_ . ' At these words he gave his whip to his
high-spirited horse , and disappeared in a moment . But Peter Rugg did
not reach home that night , nor the next; nor , when he became a missing
man , could he ever be traced beyond Mr . Cutter ' s in Menotomy . For a
long time after , on every dark and stormy night , the wife of Peter
Rugg would fancy she heard the crack of a whip , and the fleet tread of
a horse , and the rattling of a carriage , passing her door . The
neighbours , too , heard the same noises , and some said they knew it was
Rugg ' s horse; the tread on the pavement was perfectly familiar to
them . This occurred so repeatedly that at length the neighbours
watched with lanterns , and saw the real Peter Rugg , with his own horse
and chair , and child sitting beside him , pass directly before his own
door , his head turning toward his house , and himself making every
effort to stop his horse , but in vain . The next day the friends of
Mrs . Rugg exerted themselves to find her husband and child . They
inquired at every public house and stable in town; but it did not
appear that Rugg made any stay in Boston . No one , after Rugg had
passed his own door , could give any account of him; though it was
asserted by some that the clatter of Rugg ' s horse and carriage over
the pavements shook the houses on both sides of the street . And this
is credible , if , indeed , Rugg ' s horse and carriage did pass on that
night . For at this day , in many of the streets , a loaded truck or team
in passing will shake the houses like an earthquake . However , Rugg ' s
neighbours never afterward watched again; some of them treated it all
as a delusion , and thought no more of it . Others , of a different
opinion , shook their heads and said nothing . Thus Rugg and his child , 
horse and chair , were soon forgotten; and probably many in the
neighbourhood never heard a word on the subject . 

 " There was indeed a rumour that Rugg afterward was seen in
Connecticut , between Suffield and Hartford , passing through the
country like a streak of chalk . This gave occasion to Rugg ' s friends
to make further inquiry . But the more they inquired , the more they
were baffled . If they heard of Rugg one day in Connecticut , the next
day they heard of him winding around the hills in New Hampshire; and
soon after , a man in a chair , with a small child , exactly answering
the description of Peter Rugg , would be seen in Rhode Island , 
inquiring the way to Boston . 

 " But that which chiefly gave a colour of mystery to the story of Peter
Rugg was the affair at Charlestown bridge . The toll-gatherer asserted
that sometimes , on the darkest and most stormy nights , when no object
could be discerned about the time Rugg was missing , a horse and
wheelcarriage , with a noise equal to a troop , would at midnight , in
utter contempt of the rates of toll , pass over the bridge . This
occurred so frequently that the toll-gatherer resolved to attempt a
discovery . Soon after , at the usual time , apparently the same horse
and carriage approached the bridge from Charlestown square . The
toll-gatherer , prepared , took his stand as near the middle of the
bridge as he dared , with a large three-legged stool in his hand . As
the appearance passed , he threw the stool at the horse , but heard
nothing except the noise of the stool skipping across the bridge . The
toll-gatherer on the next day asserted that the stool went directly
through the body of the horse , and he persisted in that belief ever
after . Whether Rugg , or whoever the person was , ever passed the bridge
again , the toll-gatherer would never tell; and when questioned , seemed
anxious to waive the subject . And thus Peter Rugg and his child , horse
and carriage , remain a mystery to this day . " 

This , sir , is all that I could learn of Peter Rugg in Boston . . . . ﻿There was once a woman who had three daughters , of whom the eldest was
named  " One Eye , " because she had only one eye in the middle of her
forehead . The second had two eyes , like other people , and she was called
 " Two Eyes . " The youngest had three eyes , two like her second sister , and
one in the middle of her forehead , like the eldest , and she bore the
name of  " Three Eyes . " 

Now because little Two Eyes looked just like other people , her mother
and sisters could not endure her . They said to her ,  " You are not better
than common folks , with your two eyes; you don ' t belong to us . " 

So they pushed her about , and threw all their old clothes to her for her
to wear , and gave her only the pieces that were left to eat , and did
everything that they could to make her miserable . It so happened that
little Two Eyes was sent into the fields to take care of the goats , and
she was often very hungry , although her sisters had as much as they
liked to eat . So one day she seated herself on a mound in the field , and
began to weep and cry so bitterly that two little rivulets flowed from
her eyes . Once , in the midst of her sorrow she looked up , and saw a
woman standing near her who said ,  " What are you weeping for , little Two
Eyes ? " 

 " I cannot help weeping , " she replied;  " for because I have two eyes , like
other people , my mother and sisters cannot bear me; they push me about
from one corner to another and make we wear their old clothes , and give
me nothing to eat but what is left , so that I am always hungry . To-day
they gave me so little that I am nearly starved . " 

 " Dry up your tears , little Two Eyes , " said the wise woman;  " I will tell
you something to do which will prevent you from ever being hungry again . 
You have only to say to your own goat:

  " ' Little goat , if you ' re able , 
 Pray deck out my table , ' 

 " and immediately there will be a pretty little table before you full of
all sorts of good things for you to eat , as much as you like . And when
you have had enough , and you do not want the table any more , you need
only say:

  " ' Little goat , when you ' re able , 
 Remove my nice table , ' 

 " and it will vanish from your eyes . " 

Then the wise woman went away .  " Now , " thought little Two Eyes ,  " I will
try if what she says is true , for I am very hungry , " so she said:

  " Little goat , if you ' re able , 
 Pray deck out my table . " 

The words were scarcely spoken , when a beautiful little table stood
really before her; it had a white cloth and plates , and knives and
forks , and silver spoons , and such a delicious dinner , smoking hot as if
it had just come from the kitchen . Then little Two Eyes sat down and
said the shortest grace she knew-- " Pray God be our guest for all time . 
Amen " --before she allowed herself to taste anything . But oh , how she did
enjoy her dinner ! and when she had finished , she said , as the wise woman
had taught her:

  " Little goat , when you ' re able , 
 Remove my nice table . " 

In a moment , the table and everything upon it had disappeared .  " That is
a pleasant way to keep house , " said little Two Eyes , and felt quite
contented and happy . In the evening , when she went home with the goat , 
she found an earthenware dish with some scraps which her sisters had
left for her , but she did not touch them . The next morning she went away
with the goat , leaving them behind where they had been placed for her . 
The first and second times that she did so , the sisters did not notice
it; but when they found it happened every day , they said one to the
other ,  " There is something strange about little Two Eyes , she leaves her
supper every day , and all that has been put for her has been wasted; she
must get food somewhere else . " 

So they determined to find out the truth , and they arranged that when
Two Eyes took her goat to the field , One Eye should go with her to take
particular notice of what she did , and discover if anything was brought
for her to eat and drink . 

So when Two Eyes started with her goat , One Eye said to her ,  " I am going
with you to-day to see if the goat gets her food properly while you are
watching the rest . " 

But Two Eyes knew what she had in her mind . So she drove the goat into
the long grass , and said ,  " Come , One Eye , let us sit down here and rest , 
and I will sing to you . " 

One Eye seated herself , and , not being accustomed to walk so far , or to
be out in the heat of the sun , she began to feel tired , and as little
Two Eyes kept on singing , she closed her one eye and fell fast asleep . 

When Two Eyes saw this , she knew that One Eye could not betray her , so
she said:

  " Little goat , if you are able , 
 Come and deck my pretty table . " 

She seated herself when it appeared , and ate and drank very quickly , and
when she had finished she said:

  " Little goat , when you are able , 
 Come and clear away my table . " 

It vanished in the twinkling of an eye; and then Two Eyes woke up One
Eye , and said ,  " Little One Eye , you are a clever one to watch goats;
for , while you are asleep , they might be running all over the world . 
Come , let us go home ! " 

So they went to the house , and little Two Eyes again left the scraps on
the dish untouched , and One Eye could not tell her mother whether little
Two Eyes had eaten anything in the field; for she said to excuse
herself ,  " I was asleep . " 

The next day the mother said to Three Eyes ,  " You must go to the field
this time , and find out whether there is anyone who brings food to
little Two Eyes; for she must eat and drink secretly . " 

So when little Two Eyes started with her goat , Three Eyes followed , and
said ,  " I am going with you to-day , to see if the goats are properly fed
and watched . " 

But Two Eyes knew her thoughts; so she led the goat through the long
grass to tire Three Eyes , and at last she said ,  " Let us sit down here
and rest , and I will sing to you , Three Eyes . " 

She was glad to sit down , for the walk and the heat of the sun had
really tired her; and , as her sister continued her song , she was obliged
to close two of her eyes , and they slept , but not the third . In fact , 
Three Eyes was wide awake with one eye , and heard and saw all that Two
Eyes did; for poor little Two Eyes , thinking she was asleep , said her
speech to the goat , and the table came with all the good things on it , 
and was carried away when Two Eyes had eaten enough; and the cunning
Three Eyes saw it all with her one eye . But she pretended to be asleep
when her sister came to wake her and told her she was going home . 

That evening , when little Two Eyes again left the supper they placed
aside for her , Three Eyes said to her mother ,  " I know where the proud
thing gets her good eating and drinking; " and then she described all she
had seen in the field .  " I saw it all with one eye , " she said;  " for she
had made my other two eyes close with her fine singing , but luckily the
one in my forehead remained open . " 

Then the envious mother cried out to poor little Two Eyes ,  " You wish to
have better food than we , do you ? You shall lose your wish ! " She took up
a butcher ' s knife , went out , and stuck the good little goat in the
heart , and it fell dead . 

When little Two Eyes saw this , she went out into the field , seated
herself on a mound , and wept most bitter tears . 

Presently the wise woman stood again before her , and said ,  " Little Two
Eyes , why do you weep ? " 

 " Ah ! " she replied ,  " I must weep . The goat , who every day spread my table
so beautifully , has been killed by my mother , and I shall have again to
suffer from hunger and sorrow . " 

 " Little Two Eyes , " said the wise woman ,  " I will give you some good
advice . Go home , and ask your sister to give you the inside of the
slaughtered goat , and then go and bury it in the ground in front of the
house-door . " 

On saying this the wise woman vanished . 

Little Two Eyes went home quickly , and said to her sister ,  " Dear sister , 
give me some part of my poor goat . I don ' t want anything valuable; only
give me the inside . " 

Her sister laughed , and said ,  " Of course you can have that , if you don ' t
want anything else . " 

So little Two Eyes took the inside; and in the evening , when all was
quiet , buried it in the ground outside the house-door , as the wise woman
had told her to do . 

The next morning , when they all rose and looked out of the window , there
stood a most wonderful tree , with leaves of silver and apples of gold
hanging between them . Nothing in the wide world could be more beautiful
or more costly . They none of them knew how the tree could come there in
one night , excepting little Two Eyes . She supposed it had grown up from
the inside of the goat; for it stood over where she had buried it in the
earth . 

Then said the mother to little One Eye ,  " Climb up , my child , and break
off some of the fruit from the tree . " 

One Eye climbed up , but when she tried to catch a branch and pluck one
of the apples , it escaped from her hand , and so it happened every time
she made the attempt , and , do what she would , she could not reach one . 

 " Three Eyes , " said the mother ,  " climb up , and try what you can do;
perhaps you will be able to see better with your three eyes than One Eye
can . " 

One Eye slid down from the tree , and Three Eyes climbed up . But Three
Eyes was not more skilful; with all her efforts she could not draw the
branches , nor the fruit , near enough to pluck even a leaf , for they
sprang back as she put out her hand . 

At last the mother was impatient , and climbed up herself , but with no
more success , for , as she appeared to grasp a branch , or fruit , her hand
closed upon thin air . 

 " May I try ? " said little Two Eyes;  " perhaps I may succeed . " 

 " You , indeed ! " cried her sisters;  " you , with your two eyes , what can you
do ? " 

But Two Eyes climbed up , and the golden apples did not fly back from her
when she touched them , but almost laid themselves on her hand , and she
plucked them one after another , till she carried down her own little
apron full . 

The mother took them from her , and gave them to her sisters , as she said
little Two Eyes did not handle them properly; but this was only from
jealousy , because little Two Eyes was the only one who could reach the
fruit , and she went into the house feeling more spiteful to her than
ever . 

It happened that while all three sisters were standing under the tree
together a young knight rode by .  " Run away , quick , and hide yourself , 
little Two Eyes; hide yourself somewhere , for we shall be quite ashamed
for you to be seen . " Then they pushed the poor girl , in great haste , 
under an empty cask , which stood near the tree , and several of the
golden apples that she had plucked along with her . 

As the knight came nearer they saw he was a handsome man; and presently
he halted , and looked with wonder and pleasure at the beautiful tree
with its silver leaves and golden fruit . 

At last he spoke to the sisters , and asked:  " To whom does this beautiful
tree belong ? If a man possessed only one branch he might obtain all he
wished for in the world . " 

 " This tree belongs to us , " said the two sisters ,  " and we will break off
a branch for you if you like . " They gave themselves a great deal of
trouble in trying to do as they offered; but all to no purpose , for the
branches and the fruit evaded their efforts , and sprung back at every
touch . 

 " This is wonderful , " exclaimed the knight ,  " that the tree should belong
to you , and yet you are not able to gather even a branch . " 

They persisted , however , in declaring that the tree was their own
property . At this moment little Two Eyes , who was angry because her
sisters had not told the truth , caused two of the golden apples to slip
out from under the cask , and they rolled on till they reached the feet
of the knight ' s horse . When he saw them , he asked in astonishment where
they came from . 

The two ugly maidens replied that they had another sister , but they
dared not let him see her , for she had only two eyes , like common
people , and was named little Two Eyes . 

But the knight felt very anxious to see her , and called out ,  " Little Two
Eyes , come here . " Then came Two Eyes , quite comforted , from the empty
cask , and the knight was astonished to find her so beautiful . 

Then he said ,  " Little Two Eyes , can you break off a branch of the tree
for me ? " 

 " Oh yes , " she replied ,  " I can , very easily , for the tree belongs to me . " 
And she climbed up , and , without any trouble , broke off a branch with
its silver leaves and golden fruit and gave it to the knight . 

He looked down at her as she stood by his horse , and said:  " Little Two
Eyes , what shall I give you for this ? " 

 " Ah ! " she answered ,  " I suffer from hunger and thirst , and sorrow , and
trouble , from early morning till late at night; if you would only take
me with you , and release me , I should be so happy . " 

Then the knight lifted the little maiden on his horse , and rode home
with her to his father ' s castle . There she was given beautiful clothes
to wear , and as much to eat and drink as she wished , and as she grew up
the young knight loved her so dearly that they were married with great
rejoicings . 

Now , when the two sisters saw little Two Eyes carried away by the
handsome young knight , they were overjoyed at their good fortune .  " The
wonderful tree belongs to us now , " they said;  " even if we cannot break
off a branch , yet everybody who passes will stop to admire it , and make
acquaintance with us , and , who knows ? we may get husbands after all . " 

But when they rose the next morning , lo ! the tree had vanished , and with
it all their hopes . And on this very morning , when little Two Eyes
looked out of her chamber window of the castle , she saw , to her great
joy , that the tree had followed her . 

Little Two Eyes lived for a long time in great happiness; but she heard
nothing of her sisters , till one day two poor women came to the castle , 
to beg for alms . Little Two Eyes saw them , and , looking earnestly in
their faces , she recognised her two sisters , who had become so poor that
they were obliged to beg their bread from door to door . 

But the good sister received them most kindly , and promised to take care
of them and give them all they wanted . And then they did indeed repent
and feel sorry for having treated her so badly in their youthful days . 


