A brother took his sister by the hand and said , "Since our mother is
dead we have no more happy hours: our stepmother beats us every day , 
and whenever we come near her she kicks us away . She gives us hard
crusts and nasty scraps to eat , and the dog under the table fares
better than we do , for he does sometimes get a nice bit thrown to him . 
It would break our mother's heart if she knew it ! Come , we will go out
into the wide world together . "

They went along the whole day through meadows , over rocks and stones , 
and when it rained the little sister said , "Heaven and our hearts are
crying together . " In the evening they came to a great wood , and were
so worn out with grief , hunger , and weariness , that they sat down in a
hollow tree and went to sleep . 

The next morning , when they awoke , the sun was already high in the
heavens , and shone down very hot on the tree . Upon which said the
brother , "Sister , I am thirsty; I would go and have a drink if I knew
where there was a spring: I think I can hear one trickling . " He got
up , took his sister by the hand , and they went to look for the spring . 

The wicked stepmother , however , who was a witch , and well knew how the
children had run away , had crept after them secretly , in the way
witches do , and had bewitched all the springs in the wood . When they
had found a spring that was dancing brightly over the stones , the
brother stooped down to drink; but his sister heard a voice in its
murmur , which said , "Whoever drinks of me will become a tiger . "
Eagerly the little sister cried , "I pray thee , brother , do not drink , 
lest thou become a wild beast and tear me to pieces . "

The brother did not drink , although he was so thirsty , but said , "I
will wait for the next spring . " When they came to the next , the little
sister heard it say , "Who drinks of me will become a wolf; who drinks
of me will become a wolf ! " and cried out , "Oh brother , I pray thee do
not drink , lest thou become a wolf and eat me up . "

The brother did not drink , but said , "I will wait till I come to the
next spring , but then I must drink , say what you will , for my thirst
is getting unbearable . "

And when they came to the third spring , the little sister heard a
voice in its murmur , saying , "Whoever drinks of me will become a roe , "
and she cried , "Oh brother , do not drink , I pray thee , lest thou
become a roe and run away from me . " But the brother had already knelt
down by the stream , stooped down , and drank of the water; and as soon
as the first drop touched his lips , there he lay--a white roe . 

The little sister cried over her poor bewitched brother , and the roe
cried also as he rested mournfully beside her . At last the maiden
said , "Never mind , dear Roe , I will never forsake you . " So she took
off her golden garter and put it round the roe's neck , then pulled
some rushes and wove them into a cord . To this she tied the little
animal and led him on , and they both went still deeper into the wood . 
When they had gone a long , long way , they came at last to a little
house , into which the maiden peeped; and as it was empty , she thought , 
"Here we may stay and live . " So she made a pretty bed of leaves and
moss for the roe; and every morning she went out and gathered roots , 
berries , and nuts for herself; and for the roe she brought tender
grass , which he ate out of her hand , and played about and was very
happy . In the evening , when the little sister was tired and had said
her prayers , she laid her head upon the roe , who was her pillow , and
went sweetly to sleep; and if her brother had only kept his proper
shape , they would have led a very happy life . 

They had lived alone in this way during a long time , when it happened
that the king of the country held a great hunt in the forest . Through
the trees might be heard the blowing of horns , the barking of dogs , 
and the joyous cries of the hunters , which when the little roe heard
he was almost beside himself with delight . "Oh , " said he to his
sister , "let me go and see the hunt: I can no longer refrain;" and he
begged hard till she consented . 

"But , " said she , "when you return at evening I shall have shut my door
against the wild huntsmen , and in order that I may know you , knock
and say , 'My little sister , let me in;' but if you do not say so , I
shall not open the door . "

Now off sprang the roe , and was so happy to find himself in the open
air . The king and his huntsmen saw the beautiful beast and set off
after him , but they could not catch him; for when they thought they
had certainly got him , he sprang over a bush and disappeared . When it
was dark he galloped up to the little house , knocked , and cried , "My
little sister , let me in . " And when the door was opened he sprang in , 
and rested all night on his pretty little bed . Next morning the hunt
began again , and when the roe heard the blast of the horns , and the
"Ho ! ho ! " of the hunters , he could not rest , and cried , "Sister , open
the door; I must go . "

His sister opened the door and said , "But mind you must be back in the
evening and make your little speech , that I may let you in . "

When the king and his huntsmen saw the white roe with the gold band
once more , they all rode after him , but he was too quick and agile for
them . This chase lasted the whole day; at last , towards evening , the
hunters surrounded him , and wounded him with an arrow in the foot , so
that he was forced to limp and go slowly . One of the hunters , creeping
softly after him to the little house , heard him say , "My sister , let
me in , " and saw that the door was opened and immediately shut to
again; so he went back to the king , and told him all he had seen and
heard . 

"We will have another hunt to-morrow , " said the king . 

The little sister was greatly alarmed when she saw her white roe was
wounded; she washed off the blood , laid herbs upon the place , and
said , "Go now to thy bed , dear Roe , and get well . "

The wound , however , was so slight that the next morning he felt
nothing of it , and when he heard the noise of the hunt , he said , "I
cannot keep away; I must go , and nothing shall keep me . "

His sister cried and said , "Now you will go and be killed , and leave
me here alone in the forest , forsaken by all the world; I will not let
you go out . "

"Then I shall die here of grief , " answered the roe: "for when I hear
the sound of the horn , I do feel as if I could jump out of my shoes . "
So his sister could not do less than open the door with a heavy heart , 
and the roe sprang out joyfully into the forest . 

As soon as the king saw him , he said to his huntsmen , "Now hunt him
all day till evening , but don't do anything to hurt him . "

When the sun was set the king said to his huntsman , "Now come and show
me the little house you saw in the wood . " And when he was before the
door he knocked and cried , "Dear little sister , let me in . "
Immediately the door opened , the king entered , and there stood a
maiden more beautiful than any one he had ever seen . The damsel was
frightened when she found there had come in , not her roe , but a man
who wore a golden crown on his head . But the king looked kindly at
her , took her hand and said , "Wilt thou go with me to my castle , and
be my dear wife ? "

"Oh yes , " answered the maiden , "but the roe must come with me , for I
cannot forsake him . "

The king replied , "He shall remain with you as long as you live , and
shall want for nothing . "

At this moment he came springing in , his sister tied the cord of
rushes round his neck , led him with her own hand , and they all left
the little house together . 

The king took the beautiful maiden on his own horse and conducted her
to his castle , where the marriage was celebrated with great pomp . She
was now queen , and they lived a long time very happily together; while
the roe was petted and taken care of , and played all day about the
palace-garden . 

But the wicked stepmother , on whose account these children had been
driven into the wide world , thought nothing less than that the little
sister had been torn to pieces by wild beasts in the forest , and that
the brother , in the shape of a roe , had been killed by the hunters . 
When she now heard they were so happy , and that everything went well
with them , envy and spite raged in her heart and gave her no rest , and
her only thought was how she could do some mischief to them both . Her
own daughter , who was as ugly as the night and had only one eye , was
continually reproaching her , and saying , "It is I who ought to have
been made queen . "

"Never mind , " said the old witch to console her; "when the time comes
I will manage it . "

By and by the queen gave birth to a beautiful little boy; and the king
being away at the hunt , the old witch took upon herself the form of
the lady-in-waiting , entered the room where the queen lay , and said to
her , "Come , the bath is ready , which will do you good and give you new
strength; make haste before it gets cold . " Her daughter was also at
hand , and they carried the poor weak queen between them into the
bathroom , and laid her in the bath: then they shut the door and ran
away . But under the bath they had first lighted a great furnace-fire , 
so that the beautiful young queen could not save herself from being
scorched alive . 

When that was done the old witch took her own daughter , put a cap on
her , and laid her on the bed in the queen's room . She changed her also
into the shape of the young queen , all except her one eye , and she
could not give her another . But in order that the king might not
observe it , she was obliged to lie on that side where there was no
eye . In the evening , when he was come home , and heard that he had a
little son , he was very much delighted , and wished to visit his dear
wife and see how she was getting on; on which the old woman cried out
in a great hurry , "As you value your life , don't touch the curtain;
the queen must not see the light , and must be left quite quiet . " So
the king went away , and never found out that it was a false queen in
the bed . 

But when it was midnight , and all the world was asleep , the nurse who
was sitting beside the cradle , and who was the only person awake , saw
the door open and the true queen come in . She took the baby out of the
cradle , laid it in her arms , and nursed it tenderly . She then shook
up the pillows , laid it down again , and covered it with the
counterpane . She did not forget the roe either , but went into the
corner where it lay , and stroked it gently . After this she passed out , 
quite silently , through the door; and the nurse inquired next morning
of the sentinels whether any one had gained entrance into the palace
during the night , but they answered , "No--we have seen nobody . " She
continued to come in the same way for several nights , though she spoke
never a word: the nurse always saw her , but never dared to mention it . 

When some time had passed , the queen at last began to speak , and
said--

 "How is my baby ? How is my roe ? 
 I can come again twice , then for ever must go . "

The nurse could not answer her; but when she had disappeared she went
to the king , and told him all about it , upon which he cried , "What
does it mean ? I will myself watch by the child to-night . "

In the evening he came to the nursery , and there at midnight the dead
queen appeared , and said--

 "How is my baby ? How is my roe ? 
 I can come but once more , then for ever must go;"

and nursed and fondled the baby as before , then vanished . The king did
not dare to address her , but watched again the following night . This
time she said--

 "How is my baby ? How is my roe ? 
 I can come but this once , then for ever must go . "

Upon which the king could no longer contain himself , but sprang
forward and cried , "Thou canst surely be no one but my own dear wife ! "

She replied , "Yes , I am thy dear wife;" and as soon as she had spoken
these words she was restored to life , and became once more fresh and
blooming . 

Then she related to the king the crime committed on her by the old
witch and her ugly daughter , whom he at once commanded to be brought
to judgment , and had sentence passed upon them . The daughter was taken
forth into the woods , where the wild beasts tore her in pieces , and
the witch was burnt . And behold ! as soon as there was nothing left of
her but ashes , the white roe became changed again and resumed his
human form; so they all lived happily together till the end of their
lives . 


