There was once a most beautiful and amiable princess who was called  " The
Fair One with Locks of Gold , " for her hair shone brighter than gold , and
flowed in curls down to her feet , her head was always encircled by a
wreath of beautiful flowers , and pearls and diamonds . 

A handsome , rich , young prince , whose territories joined to hers , was
deeply in love with the reports he heard of her , and sent to demand her
in marriage . The ambassador sent with proposals was most sumptuously
attired , and surrounded by lackeys on beautiful horses , as well as
charged with every kind of compliment , from the anxious prince , who
hoped he would bring the princess back with him; but whether it was that
she was not that day in a good humour , or that she did not like the
speeches made by the ambassador , I don ' t know , but she returned thanks
to his master for the honour he intended her , and said she had no
inclination to marry . When the ambassador arrived at the king ' s chief
city , where he was expected with great impatience , the people were
extremely afflicted to see him return without the Fair One with the
Locks of Gold; and the king wept like a child . There was a youth at
court whose beauty outshone the sun , the gracefulness of whose person
was not to be equalled , and for his gracefulness and wit , he was called
Avenant: the king loved him , and indeed every body except the envious . 
Avenant being one day in company with some persons , inconsiderately
said ,  " If the king had sent me to the Fair One with Locks of Gold , I
dare say I could have prevailed on her to return with me . " These enviers
of Avenant ' s prosperity immediately ran open mouthed to the king , 
saying ,  " Sir sir , what does your majesty think Avenant says ? He boasts
that if you had sent him to the Fair One with the Golden Hair , he could
have brought her with him; which shows he is so vain as to think himself
handsomer than your majesty and that her love for him would have made
her follow him wherever he went . " This put the king into a violent rage . 
 " What ! " said he ,  " does this youngster make a jest at my misfortune , and
pretend to set himself above me ? Go and put him immediately in my great
tower , and there let him starve to death . " The king ' s guards went and
seized Avenant who thought no more of what he had said , dragged him to
prison , and used him in the most cruel manner . 

One day when he was almost quite spent , he said to himself , fetching a
deep sigh ,  " Wherein can I have offended the king ? He has not a more
faithful subject than myself; nor have I ever done any thing to
displease him . " The king happened at that time to pass by the tower; and
stopped to hear him , notwithstanding the persuasions of those that were
with him;  " Hold your peace , " replied the king ,  " and let me hear him
out . " Which having done , and being greatly moved by his sufferings , he
opened the door of the tower , and called him by his name . Upon which
Avenant came forth in a sad condition , and , throwing himself at the
king ' s feet ,  " What have I done , sir , " said he ,  " that your majesty should
use me thus severely ? "  " Thou hast ridiculed me and my ambassador , " 
replied the king;  " and hast said , that if I had sent thee to the Fair
One with Locks of Gold , thou couldst have brought her with thee . "  " It is
true , sir , " replied Avenant ,  " for I would have so thoroughly convinced
her of your transcending qualities , that it should not have been in her
power to have denied me; and this , surely , I said in the name of your
majesty . " The king found in reality he had done no injury; so , he took
him away with him , repenting heartily of the wrong he had done him . 
After having given him an excellent supper , the king sent for him into
his cabinet .  " Avenant , " said he ,  " I still love the Fair One with Locks
of Gold; I have a mind to send thee to her , to try whether thou canst
succeed , " Avenant replied , he was ready to obey his majesty in all
things , and would depart the very next morning .  " Hold , " said the king , 
 " I will provide thee first with a most sumptuous equipage . "  " There is no
necessity for that , " answered Avenant;  " I need only a good horse and
your letters of credence . " Upon this the king embraced him; being
overjoyed to see him so soon ready . 

It was upon a Monday morning that he took leave of the king and his
friends . Being on his journey by break of day , and entering into a
spacious meadow , a fine thought came into his head; he alighted
immediately , and seated himself by the bank of a little stream that
watered one side of the meadow , and wrote the sentiment down in his
pocket book . After he had done writing , he looked about him every way , 
being charmed with the beauties of the place , and suddenly perceived a
large gilded carp , which stirred a little , and that was all it could do , 
for having attempted to catch some little flies , it had leaped so far
out of the water , as to throw itself upon the grass , where it was almost
dead , not being able to recover its natural element . Avenant took pity
on the poor creature , and though it was a fish-day , and he might have
carried it away for his dinner , he took it up , and gently put it again
into the river , where the carp , feeling the refreshing coolness of the
water , began to rejoice , and sunk to the bottom; but soon rising up
again , brisk and gay , to the side of the river;  " Avenant , " said the
carp ,  " I thank you for the kindness you have done me; had it not been
for you , I had died; but you have saved my life , and I will reward you . " 
After this short compliment , the carp darted itself to the bottom of the
water , leaving Avenant not a little surprised at its wit and great
civility . 

Another day , as he was pursuing his journey , he saw a crow in great
distress: being pursued by a huge eagle , he took his bow , which he
always carried abroad with him , and aiming at the eagle , let fly an
arrow , which pierced him through the body , so that he fell down dead;
which the crow seeing , came in an ecstasy of joy , and perched upon a
tree .  " Avenant , " said the crow ,  " you have been extremely generous to
succour me , who am but a poor wretched crow; but I am not ungrateful and
will do you as good a turn . " Avenant admired the wit of the crow , and
continuing his journey , he entered into a wood so early one morning , 
that he could scarcely see his way , where he heard an owl crying out
like an owl in despair . So looking about every where , he at length came
to a place where certain fowlers had spread their nets in the night-time
to catch little birds .  " What pity  ' tis , " said he ,  " men are only made to
torment one another , or else to persecute poor animals who never do them
any harm ! " So saying , he drew his knife , cut the cords , and set the owl
at liberty; who , before he took wing , said ,  " Avenant , the fowlers are
coming , I should have been taken , and must have died , without your
assistance: I have a grateful heart , and will remember it . " 

These were the three most remarkable adventures that befell Avenant in
his journey; and when he arrived at the end of it , he washed himself , 
combed and powdered his hair , and put on a suit of cloth of gold: which
having done , he put a rich embroidered scarf about his neck , with a
small basket , wherein was a little dog which he was very fond of . And
Avenant was so amiable , and did every thing with so good a grace , that
when he presented himself at the gate of the palace , all the guards paid
him great respect , and every one strove who should first give notice to
the Fair One with Locks of Gold , that Avenant , the neighbouring king ' s
ambassador , demanded audience . The princess on hearing the name of
Avenant , said ,  " It has a pleasing sound , and I dare say he is agreeable
and pleases every body; and she said to her maids of honour , go fetch me
my rich embroidered gown of blue satin , dress my hair , and bring my
wreaths of fresh flowers: let me have my high shoes , and my fan , and let
my audience chamber and throne be clean , and richly adorned; for I would
have him every where with truth say , that I am really the Fair One with
Locks of Gold . " Thus all her women were employed to dress her as a queen
should be . At length , she went to her great gallery of looking-glasses , 
to see if any thing was wanting; after which she ascended her throne of
gold , ivory , and ebony , the fragrant smell of which was superior to the
choicest balm . She also commanded her maids of honour to take their
instruments , and play to their own singing so sweetly that none should
be disgusted . 

Avenant was conducted into the chamber of audience , were he stood so
transported with admiration , that , as he afterwards said , he had
scarcely power to open his lips . At length , however , he took courage , 
and made his speech wonderfully well; wherein he prayed the princess not
to let him be so unfortunate as to return without her .  " Gentle Avenant , " 
said she ,  " all the reasons you have laid before me , are very good , and I
assure you , I would rather favour you than any other; but you must know , 
about a month since , I went to take the air by the side of a river , with
my maids of honour; as I was pulling off my glove , I pulled a ring from
my finger , which by accident fell into the river . This ring I valued
more than my whole kingdom; whence you may judge how much I am afflicted
by the loss of it . And I have made a vow never to hearken to any
proposals of marriage , unless the ambassador who makes them shall also
bring my ring . This is the present which you have to make me; otherwise
you may talk your heart out , for months and even years shall never
change my resolution . " When he returned to his lodgings , he went to bed
supperless; and his little dog , who was called Cabriole , made a fasting
night of it too , and went and lay down by his master; who did nothing
all night but sigh and lament , saying ,  " How can I find a ring that fell
into a great river a month ago ? It would be folly to attempt it . The
princess enjoined me this task , merely because she knew it was
impossible , " he continued , greatly afflicted; which Cabriole observing , 
said ,  " My dear master , pray do not despair of your good fortune; for you
are too good to be unhappy . Therefore , when it is day , let us go to the
river side . " Avenant made no answer , but gave his dog two little cuffs
with his hand , and being overwhelmed with grief , fell asleep . 

But when Cabriole perceived it was broad day , he fell a barking so loud
that he waked his master .  " Rise , sir , " said he ,  " put on your clothes , 
and let us go and try our fortune . " Avenant took his little dog ' s
advice; got up , and dressed himself , went down into the garden , and out
of the garden he walked insensibly to the river side , with his hat over
his eyes , and his arms across , thinking of nothing but taking his leave;
when all on a sudden he heard a voice call ,  " Avenant , Avenant ! " upon
which he looked around him , but seeing nothing , he concluded it was an
illusion , and was proceeding in his walk; but he presently heard himself
called again .  " Who calls me ? " said he; Cabriole , who was very little and
looked closely into the water , cried out ,  " Never believe me , if it is
not a gilded carp . " Immediately the carp appeared , and with an audible
voice said ,  " Avenant , you saved my life in the poplar meadow , where I
must have died without your assistance; and now I am come to requite
your kindness . Here , my dear Avenant , here is the ring which the Fair
One with Locks of Gold dropped into the river . " Upon which he stooped
and took it out of the carp ' s mouth; to whom he returned a thousand
thanks . And now , instead of returning home , he went directly to the
palace with little Cabriole , who skipped about , and wagged his tail for
joy , that he had persuaded his master to walk by the side of the river . 
The princess being told that Avenant desired an audience:  " Alas , " said
she ,  " the poor youth has come to take his leave of me ! He has considered
what I enjoined him as impossible , and is returning to his master . " But
Avenant being admitted , presented her the ring , saying ,  " Madam , behold I
have executed your command; and now , I hope , you will receive my master
for your royal consort . " When she saw her ring , and that it was noways
injured , she was so amazed that she could hardly believe her eyes . 
 " Surely , courteous Avenant , " said she ,  " you must be favoured by some
fairy; for naturally this is impossible . "  " Madam , " said he ,  " I am
acquainted with no fairy; but I was willing to obey your command . " 
 " Well , then , seeing you have so good a will , " continued she ,  " you must
do me another piece of service , without which I will never marry . There
is a certain prince who lives not far from hence , whose name is
Galifron , and whom nothing would serve but that he must needs marry me . 
He declared his mind to me , with most terrible menaces , that if I denied
him , he would enter my kingdom with fire and sword; but you shall judge
whether I would accept his proposal: he is a giant , as high as a
steeple; he devours men as an ape eats chestnuts; when he goes into the
country , he carries cannons in his pocket , to use instead of pistols;
and when he speaks aloud he deafens the ears of those that stand near
him . I answered him , that I did not choose to marry , and desired him to
excuse me . Nevertheless , he has not ceased to persecute me , and has put
an infinite number of my subjects to the sword: therefore , before all
other things you must fight him , and bring me his head . " 

Avenant was somewhat startled by this proposal; but , having considered
it awhile ,  " Well , madam , " said he ,  " I will fight this Galifron; I
believe I shall be vanquished; but I will die like a man of courage . " 
The princess was astonished at his intrepidity , and said a thousand
things to dissuade him from it , but all in vain . At length he arrived at
Galifron ' s castle , the roads all the way being strewed with the bones
and carcasses of men which the giant had devoured , or cut in pieces . It
was not long before Avenant saw the monster approach , and he immediately
challenged him; but there was no occasion for this , for he lifted his
iron mace , and had certainly beat out the gentle Avenant ' s brains at the
first blow , had not a crow at that instant perched upon the giant ' s
head , and with his bill pecked out both his eyes . The blood trickled
down his face , whereat he grew desperate , and laid about him on every
side; but Avenant took care to avoid his blows , and gave him many great
wounds with his sword , which he pushed up to the very hilt; so that the
giant fainted , and fell down with loss of blood . Avenant immediately cut
off his head; and while he was in an ecstasy of joy , for his good
success , the crow perched upon a tree , and said ,  " Avenant , I did not
forget the kindnesses I received at your hands , when you killed the
eagle that pursued me; I promised to make you amends , and now I have
been as good as my word . "  " I acknowledge your kindness , Mr . Crow , " 
replied Avenant;  " I am still your debtor , and your servant . " So saying , 
he mounted his courser , and rode away with the giant ' s horrid head . When
he arrived at the city , every body crowded after him , crying out ,  " Long
live the valiant Avenant , who has slain the cruel monster ! " so that the
princess , who heard the noise , and trembling for fear she should have
heard of Avenant ' s death , durst not inquire what was the matter . But
presently after , she saw Avenant enter with the giant ' s head; at the
sight of which she trembled , though there was nothing to fear .  " Madam , " 
said he ,  " behold your enemy is dead; and now , I hope , you will no longer
refuse the king my master . "  " Alas ! " replied the Fair One with Locks of
Gold ,  " I must still refuse him , unless you can find means to bring me
some of the water of the gloomy cave . Not far from hence , " continued
she ,  " there is a very deep cave , about six leagues in compass; the
entrance into which is guarded by two dragons . The dragons dart fire
from their mouths and eyes; and when you have got into this cave , you
will meet with a very deep hole , into which you must go down , and you
will find it full of toads , adders and serpents . At the bottom of this
hole there is a kind of cellar , through which runs the fountain of
beauty and health . This is the water I must have; its virtues are
wonderful; for the fair , by washing in it , preserve their beauty; and
the deformed it renders beautiful; if they are young , it preserves them
always youthful; and if old it makes them young again . Now judge you , 
Avenant , whether I will ever leave my kingdom without carrying some of
this water along with me . "  " Madam , " said he ,  " you are so beautiful , that
this water will be of no use to you; but I am an unfortunate ambassador , 
whose death you seek . However , I will go in search of what you desire , 
though I am certain never to return . " 

At length he arrived at the top of a mountain , where he sat down to rest
himself; giving his horse liberty to feed , and Cabriole to run after the
flies . He knew that the gloomy cave was not far off , and looked about to
see whether he could discover it; and at length he perceived a horrid
rock as black as ink , whence issued a thick smoke; and immediately after
he spied one of the dragons casting forth fire from his jaws and eyes;
his skin all over yellow and green , with prodigious claws and a long
tail rolled up in an hundred folds . Avenant , with a resolution to die in
the attempt , drew his sword , and with the phial which the Fair One with
Locks of Gold had given him to fill with the water of beauty , went
towards the cave , saying to his little dog ,  " Cabriole , here is an end of
me; I never shall be able to get this water , it is so well guarded by
the dragons; therefore when I am dead , fill this phial with my blood , 
and carry it to my princess , that she may see what her severity has cost
me: then go to the king my master and give him an account of my
misfortunes . " While he was saying this , he heard a voice call  " Avenant , 
Avenant ! "  " Who calls me ? " said he; and presently he espied an owl in the
hole of an old hollow tree , who , calling him again , said ,  " You rescued
me from the fowler ' s net , where I had been assuredly taken , had you not
delivered me . I promised to make you amends , and now the time is come;
give me your phial; I am acquainted with all the secret inlets into the
gloomy cave , and will go and fetch you the water of beauty . " Avenant
most gladly gave the phial , and the owl , entering without any impediment
into the cave , filled it , and in less than a quarter of an hour returned
with it well stopped . Avenant was overjoyed at his good fortune , gave
the owl a thousand thanks , and returned with a merry heart to the city . 
Being arrived at the palace , he presented the phial to the Fair One with
Locks of Gold , who had then nothing further to say . She returned Avenant
thanks , and gave orders for every thing that was requisite for her
departure: after which she set forward with him . The Fair One with Locks
of Gold thought Avenant very amiable , and said to him sometimes upon the
road ,  " If you had been willing , I could have made you a king; and then
we need not have left my kingdom . " But Avenant replied ,  " I would not
have been guilty of such a piece of treachery to my master for all the
kingdoms of the earth; though I must acknowledge your beauties are more
resplendent than the sun . " 

At length they arrived at the king ' s chief city , who understanding that
the Fair One with Locks of Gold was arrived , he went forth to meet her , 
and made her the richest presents in the world . The nuptials were
solemnized with such demonstrations of joy , that nothing else was
discoursed of . But the Fair One with Locks of Gold , who loved Avenant in
her heart , was never pleased but when she was in his company , and would
be always speaking in his praise:  " I had never come hither , " said she to
the king ,  " had it not been for Avenant , who , to serve me , has conquered
impossibilities; you are infinitely obliged to him; he procured me the
water of beauty and health; by which I shall never grow old , and shall
always preserve my health and beauty . " The enviers of Avenant ' s
happiness , who heard the queen ' s words , said to the king ,  " Were your
majesty inclined to be jealous , you have reason enough to be so , for the
queen is desperately in love with Avenant . "  " Indeed , " said the king ,  " I
am sensible of the truth of what you tell me; let him be put in the
great tower , with fetters upon his feet and hands . " Avenant was
immediately seized . However , his little dog Cabriole never forsook him , 
but cheered him the best he could , and brought him all the news of the
court . When the Fair One with Locks of Gold was informed of his
misfortunes , she threw herself at the king ' s feet , and all in tears
besought him to release Avenant out of prison . But the more she besought
him the more he was incensed , believing it was her affection that made
her so zealous a suppliant in his behalf . Finding she could not prevail , 
she said no more to him , but grew very pensive and melancholy . 

The king took it into his head that she did not think him handsome
enough; so he resolved to wash his face with the water of beauty , in
hopes that the queen would then conceive a greater affection for him
than she had . This water stood in a phial upon a table in the queen ' s
chamber , where she had put it , that it might not be out of her sight . 
But one of the chambermaids going to kill a spider with her besom , by
accident threw down the phial , and broke it , so that the water was lost . 
She dried it up with all the speed she could , and not knowing what to
do , she bethought herself that she had seen a phial of clear water in
the king ' s cabinet very like that she had broken . Without any more ado , 
therefore , she went and fetched that phial , and set it upon the table in
place of the other . This water which was in the king ' s cabinet , was a
certain water which he made use of to poison the great lords and princes
of his court when they were convicted of any great crime; to which
purpose , instead of cutting off their heads , or hanging them , he caused
their faces to be rubbed with this water , which cast them into so
profound a sleep that they never waked again . Now the king one evening
took this phial , and rubbed his face well with the water , after which he
fell asleep and died . Cabriole was one of the first that came to a
knowledge of this accident , and immediately ran to inform Avenant of it
who bid him go to the Fair One with Locks of Gold , and remind her of the
poor prisoner . Cabriole slipped unperceived through the crowd , for there
was a great noise and hurry at court upon the king ' s death; and getting
to the queen ,  " Madam , " said he ,  " remember poor Avenant . " She presently
called to mind the afflictions he had suffered for her sake , and his
fidelity . Without speaking a word , she went directly to the great tower , 
and took off the fetters from Avenant ' s feet and hands herself; after
which , putting the crown upon his head , and the royal mantle about his
shoulders ,  " Amiable Avenant , " said she ,  " I will make you a sovereign
prince , and take you for my consort . " Avenant threw himself at her feet , 
and in terms the most passionate and respectful returned her thanks . 
Every body was overjoyed to have him for their king: the nuptials were
the most splendid in the world; and the Fair One . with Locks of Gold
lived a long time with her beloved Avenant , both happy and contented in
the enjoyment of each other . 


