There was , some time ago , a gentleman who was very rich . He had fine
town and country houses , his dishes and plates were all of gold or
silver , his rooms were hung with damask , his chairs and sofas were
covered with the richest silks , and his carriages were all gilt with
gold in a grand style . But it happened that this gentleman had a blue
beard , which made him so very frightful and ugly , that none of the
ladies , in the parts where he lived , would venture to go into his
company . Now there was a certain lady of rank , who lived very near him , 
and had two daughters , both of them of very great beauty . Blue Beard
asked her to bestow one of them upon him for a wife , and left it to
herself to choose which of the two it should be . But both the young
ladies again and again said they would never marry Blue Beard; yet , to
be as civil as they could , each of them said , the only reason why she
would not have him was , because she was loath to hinder her sister from
the match , which would be such a good one for her . Still the truth of
the matter was , they could neither of them bear the thoughts of having a
husband with a blue beard; and besides , they had heard of his having
been married to several wives before , and nobody could tell what had
ever become of any of them . As Blue Beard wished very much to gain their
favour , he asked the lady and her daughters , and some ladies who were on
a visit at their house , to go with him to one of his country seats , 
where they spent a whole week , during which they passed all their time
in nothing but parties for hunting and fishing , music , dancing , and
feasts . No one even thought of going to bed , and the nights were passed
in merry-makings of all kinds . In short , the time rolled on in so much
pleasure , that the youngest of the two sisters began to think that the
beard which she had been so much afraid of , was not so very blue , and
that the gentleman who owned it was vastly civil and pleasing . Soon
after their return home , she told her mother that she had no longer any
dislike to accept of Blue Beard for her husband; and in a very short
time they were married . 

About a month after the marriage had taken place , Blue Beard told his
wife that he should be forced to leave her for a few weeks , as he had
some affairs to attend to in the country . He desired her to be sure to
indulge herself in every kind of pleasure , to invite as many of her
friends as she liked , and to treat them with all sorts of dainties , that
her time might pass pleasantly till he came back again .  " Here , " said he , 
 " are the keys of the two large wardrobes . This is the key of the great
box that contains the best plate , which we use for company , this belongs
to my strong box , where I keep my money , and this belongs to the casket , 
in which are all my jewels . Here also is a master-key to all the rooms
in the house; but this small key belongs to the closet at the end of the
long gallery on the ground floor . I give you leave , " said he ,  " to open , 
or to do what you like with all the rest except this closet . This , my
dear , you must not enter , nor even put the key into the lock , for all
the world . If you do not obey me in this one thing , you must expect the
most dreadful punishments . " She promised to obey his orders in the most
faithful manner; and Blue Beard , after kissing her tenderly , stepped
into his coach , and drove away . 

When Blue Beard was gone , the friends of his wife did not wait to be
asked , so eager were they to see all the riches and fine things she had
gained by marriage; for they had none of them gone to the wedding , on
account of their dislike to the blue beard of the bridegroom . As soon as
ever they came to the house , they ran about from room to room , from
closet to closet , and then from wardrobe to wardrobe , looking into each
with wonder and delight , and said , that every fresh one they came to , 
was richer and finer than what they had seen the moment before . At last
they came to the drawing-rooms , where their surprise was made still
greater by the costly grandeur of the hangings , the sofas , the chairs , 
carpets , tables , sideboards , and looking-glasses; the frames of these
last were silver-gilt , most richly adorned , and in the glasses they saw
themselves from head to foot . In short , nothing could exceed the
richness of what they saw; and they all did not fail to admire and envy
the good fortune of their friend . But all this time the bride herself
was far from thinking about the fine speeches they made to her , for she
was eager to see what was in the closet her husband had told her not to
open . So great , indeed , was her desire to do this , that , without once
thinking how rude it would be to leave her guests , she slipped away down
a private staircase that led to this forbidden closet , and in such a
hurry , that she was two or three times in danger of falling down stairs
and breaking her neck . 

When she reached the door of the closet , she stopped for a few moments
to think of the order her husband had given her , and how he had told her
that he would not fail to keep his word and punish her very severely , if
she did not obey him . But she was so very curious to know what was
inside , that she made up her mind to venture in spite of every thing . 
She then , with a trembling hand , put the key into the lock , and the door
straight flew open . As the window shutters were closed , she at first
could see nothing; but in a short time she saw that the floor was
covered with clotted blood , on which the bodies of several dead women
were lying . 

These were all the wives whom Blue Beard had married , and killed one
after another . At this sight she was ready to sink with fear , and the
key of the closet door , which she held in her hand , fell on the floor . 
When she had a little got the better of her fright , she took it up , 
locked the door , and made haste back to her own room , that she might
have a little time to get into a humour to amuse her company; but this
she could not do , so great was her fright at what she had seen . As she
found that the key of the closet had got stained with blood in falling
on the floor , she wiped it two or three times over to clean it; yet
still the blood kept on it the same as before . She next washed it , but
the blood did not move at all . She then scoured it with brickdust , and
after with sand , but in spite of all she could do , the blood was still
there; for the key was a fairy who was Blue Beard ' s friend; so that as
fast as she got off the blood on one side , it came again on the other . 
Early in the same evening Blue Beard came home , saying , that before he
had gone far on his journey he was met by a horseman , who was coming to
tell him that his affair in the country was settled without his being
present; upon which his wife said every thing she could think of , to
make him believe she was in a transport of joy at his sudden return . 

The next morning he asked her for the keys: she gave them to him; but as
she could not help showing her fright , Blue Beard easily guessed what
had been the matter .  " How is it , " said he ,  " that the key of the closet
upon the ground floor is not here ? "  " Is it not ? " said the wife ,  " then I
must have left it on my dressing-table . "  " Be sure you give it me by and
by , " replied Blue Beard . After going a good many times backwards and
forwards , as if she was looking for the key , she was at last forced to
give it to Blue Beard . He looked hard at it , and then said:  " How came
this blood upon the key ? "  " I am sure I do not know , " replied the poor
lady , at the same time turning as white as a sheet .  " You do not know ? " 
said Blue Beard sternly ,  " but I know well enough . You have been in the
closet on the ground floor ! Very well , madam: since you are so mighty
fond of this closet , you shall be sure to take your place among the
ladies you saw there . " His wife , who was almost dead with fear , now fell
upon her knees , asked his pardon a thousand times for her fault , and
begged him to forgive her , looking all the time so very mournful and
lovely , that she would have melted any heart that was not harder than a
rock . But Blue Beard only said ,  " No , no , madam; you shall die this very
minute ! "  " Alas ! " said the poor trembling creature ,  " if I must die , give
me , as least , a little time to say my prayers . "  " I give you , " replied
the cruel Blue Beard ,  " half a quarter of an hour: not a moment longer . " 
When Blue Beard had left her to herself , she called her sister; and
after telling her , as well as she could for sobbing , that she had but
half a quarter of an hour to live;  " Prithee , " said she ,  " sister Anne , " 
 ( this was her sister ' s name ) ,  " run up to the top of the tower , and see
if my brothers are not in sight , for they said they would visit me
to-day , and if you see them , make a sign for them to gallop on as fast
as ever they can . " Her sister straight did as she was desired; and the
poor trembling lady every minute cried out to her:  " Anne ! sister Anne ! 
do you see any one coming ? " Her sister said ,  " I see nothing but the sun , 
which makes a dust , and the grass , which looks green . " 

In the meanwhile , Blue Beard , with a great cimeter in his hand , bawled
as loud as he could to his wife ,  " Come down at once , or I will fetch
you . "  " One moment longer , I beseech you , " replied she , and again called
softly to her sister ,  " Sister Anne , do you see any one coming ? " To which
she answered ,  " I see nothing but the sun , which makes a dust , and the
grass , which looks green . " Blue Beard now again bawled out ,  " Come down , 
I say , this very moment , or I shall come to fetch you . "  " I am coming;
indeed I will come in one minute , " sobbed his wretched wife . Then she
once more cried out ,  " Anne ! sister Anne ! do you see any one coming ? "  " I
see , " said her sister ,  " a cloud of dust a little to the left . "  " Do you
think it is my brothers ? " said the wife .  " Alas ! no , dear sister , " 
replied she ,  " it is only a flock of sheep . "  " Will you come down , madam ? " 
said Blue Beard , in the greatest rage .  " Only one single moment more , " 
said she . And then she called out for the last time ,  " Sister Anne ! 
sister Anne ! do you see no one coming ? "  " I see , " replied her sister , 
 " two men on horseback coming; but they are still a great way off . " 
 " Thank God , " cried she ,  " they are my brothers; beckon them to make
haste . " Blue Beard now cried out so loud for her to come down , that his
voice shook the whole house . The poor lady , with her hair loose , and all
in tears , now came down , and fell on her knees , begging him to spare her
life; but he stopped her , saying ,  " All this is of no use , for you shall
die , " and then , seizing her by the hair , raised his cimeter to strike
off her head . The poor woman now begged a single moment to say one
prayer .  " No , no , " said Blue Beard ,  " I will give you no more time . You
have had too much already . " And again he raised his arm . Just at this
instant a loud knocking was heard at the gates , which made Blue Beard
wait for a moment to see who it was . The gates now flew open , and two
officers , dressed in their uniform , came in , and , with their swords in
their hands , ran straight to Blue Beard , who , seeing they were his
wife ' s brothers , tried to escape from their presence; but they pursued
and seized him before he had gone twenty steps , and plunging their
swords into his body he fell down dead at their feet . 

The poor wife , who was almost as dead as her husband , was not able at
first to rise and embrace her brothers; but she soon came to herself;
and , as Blue Beard had no heirs , she found herself the owner of his
great riches . She gave a part of his vast fortune as a marriage dowry to
her sister Anne , who soon after became the wife of a young gentleman who
had long loved her . Some of the money she laid out in buying captains ' 
commissions for her two brothers , and the rest she gave to a worthy
gentleman whom she married shortly after , and whose kind treatment soon
made her forget Blue Beard ' s cruelty . 


