There was a miller who had three sons , and when he died he divided what
he possessed among them in the following manner: He gave his mill to the
eldest , his ass to the second , and his cat to the youngest . Each of the
brothers accordingly took what belonged to him , without the help of an
attorney , who would soon have brought their little fortune to nothing , 
in law expenses . The poor young fellow who had nothing but the cat , 
complained that he was hardly used:  " My brothers , " said he ,  " by joining
their stocks together , may do well in the world , but for me , when I have
eaten my cat , and made a fur cap of his skin , I may soon die of hunger ! " 
The cat , who all this time sat listening just inside the door of a
cupboard , now ventured to come out and addressed him as follows:  " Do not
thus afflict yourself , my good master . You have only to give me a bag , 
and get a pair of boots made for me , so that I may scamper through the
dirt and the brambles , and you shall see that you are not so ill
provided for as you imagine . " Though the cat ' s master did not much
depend upon these promises , yet , as he had often observed the cunning
tricks puss used to catch the rats and mice , such as hanging upon his
hind legs , and hiding in the meal to make believe that he was dead , he
did not entirely despair of his being of some use to him in his unhappy
condition . 

When the cat had obtained what he asked for , he gayly began to equip
himself: he drew on his boots; and putting the bag about his neck , he
took hold of the strings with his fore paws , and bidding his master take
courage , immediately sallied forth . The first attempt Puss made was to
go into a warren in which there were a great number of rabbits . He put
some bran and some parsley into his bag; and then stretching himself out
at full length as if he was dead , he waited for some young rabbits , who
as yet knew nothing of the cunning tricks of the world , to come and get
into the bag , the better to feast upon the dainties he had put into it . 
Scarcely had he lain down before he succeeded as well as could be
wished . A giddy young rabbit crept into the bag , and the cat immediately
drew the strings , and killed him without mercy . Puss , proud of his prey , 
hastened directly to the palace , where he asked to speak to the king . On
being shown into the apartment of his majesty , he made a low bow , and
said ,  " I have brought you , sire , this rabbit from the warren of my lord
the marquis of Carabas , who commanded me to present it to your majesty
with the assurance of his respect . "  ( This was the title the cat thought
proper to bestow upon his master . )  " Tell my lord marquis of Carabas , " 
replied the king ,  " that I accept of his present with pleasure , and that
I am greatly obliged to him . " Soon after , the cat laid himself down in
the same manner in a field of corn , and had as much good fortune as
before; for two fine partridges got into his bag , which he immediately
killed and carried to the palace: the king received them as he had done
the rabbit , and ordered his servants to give the messenger something to
drink . In this manner he continued to carry presents of game to the king
from my lord marquis of Carabas , once at least in every week . 

One day , the cat having heard that the king intended to take a ride that
morning by the river ' s side with his daughter , who was the most
beautiful princess in the world , he said to his master:  " If you will but
follow my advice , your fortune is made . Take off your clothes , and bathe
yourself in the river , just in the place I shall show you , and leave the
rest to me , " The marquis of Carabas did exactly as he was desired , 
without being able to guess at what the cat intended . While he was
bathing the king passed by , and puss directly called out as loud as he
could bawl:  " Help ! help ! My lord marquis of Carabas is in danger of
being drowned ! " The king hearing the cries , put his head out at the
window of his carriage to see what was the matter: when , perceiving the
very cat who had brought him so many presents , he ordered his attendants
to go directly to the assistance of my lord marquis of Carabas . While
they were employed in taking the marquis out of the river , the cat ran
to the king ' s carriage , and told his majesty , that while his master was
bathing , some thieves had run off with his clothes as they lay by the
river ' s side; the cunning cat all the time having hid them under a large
stone . The king hearing this , commanded the officers of his wardrobe to
fetch one of the handsomest suits it contained , and present it to my
lord marquis of Carabas , at the same time loading him with a thousand
attentions . As the fine clothes they brought him made him look like a
gentleman , and set off his person , which was very comely , to the
greatest advantage , the king ' s daughter was mightily taken with his
appearance , and the marquis of Carabas had no sooner cast upon her two
or three respectful glances , then she became violently in love with him . 

The king insisted on his getting into the carriage and taking a ride
with them . The cat , enchanted to see how well his scheme was likely to
succeed , ran before to a meadow that was reaping , and said to the
reapers:  " Good people , if you do not tell the king , who will soon pass
this way , that the meadow you are reaping belongs to my lord marquis of
Carabas , you shall be chopped as small as mince meat . " The king did not
fail to ask the reapers to whom the meadow belonged ?  " To my lord marquis
of Carabas , " said they all at once; for the threats of the cat had
terribly frighted them .  " You have here a very fine piece of land , my
lord marquis , " said the king .  " Truly , sire , " replied he ,  " it does not
fail to bring me every year a plentiful harvest . " The cat who still went
on before , now came to a field where some other labourers were making
sheaves of the corn they had reaped , to whom he said as before:  " Good
people , if you do not tell the king who will presently pass this way , 
that the corn you have reaped in this field belongs to my lord marquis
of Carabas , you shall be chopped as small as mince meat . " The king
accordingly passed a moment after , and inquired to whom the corn he saw
belonged ?  " To my lord marquis of Carabas , " answered they very glibly;
upon which the king again complimented the marquis upon his noble
possessions . The cat still continued to go before , and gave the same
charge to all the people he met with; so that the king was greatly
astonished at the splendid fortune of my lord marquis of Carabas . Puss
at length arrived at a stately castle , which belonged to an Ogre , the
richest ever known; for all the lands the king had passed through and
admired were his . The cat took care to learn every particular about the
Ogre , and what he could do , and then asked to speak with him , saying , as
he entered the room in which he was , that he could not pass so near his
castle without doing himself the honour to inquire after his health . The
Ogre received him as civilly as an Ogre could do , and desired him to be
seated ,  " I have been informed , " said the cat ,  " that you have the gift of
changing yourself to all sorts of animals; into a lion or an elephant
for example . "  " It is very true , " replied the Ogre somewhat sternly;  " and
to convince you I will directly take the form of a lion . " The cat was so
much terrified at finding himself so near to a lion , that he sprang from
him , and climbed to the roof of the house; but not without much
difficulty , as his boots were not very fit to walk upon the tiles . 

Some minutes after , the cat perceiving that the Ogre had quitted the
form of a lion , ventured to come down from the tiles , and owned that he
had been a good deal frightened ,  " I have been further informed , " 
continued the cat ,  " but I know not how to believe it , that you have the
power of taking the form of the smallest animals also; for example of
changing yourself to a rat or a mouse: I confess I should think this
impossible . "  " Impossible ! you shall see; " and at the same instant he
changed himself into a mouse , and began to frisk about the room . The cat
no sooner cast his eyes upon the Ogre in this form , than he sprang upon
him and devoured him in an instant . In the meantime the king , admiring
as he came near it , the magnificent castle of the Ogre , ordered his
attendants to drive up to the gates , as he wished to take a nearer view
of it . The cat , hearing the noise of the carriage on the drawbridge , 
immediately came out , saying:  " Your majesty is welcome to the castle of
my lord marquis of Carabas . "  " And is this splendid castle yours also , my
lord marquis of Carabas ? I never saw anything more stately than the
building , or more beautiful than the park and pleasure grounds around
it; no doubt the castle is no less magnificent within than without:
pray , my lord marquis , indulge me with a sight of it . " 

The marquis gave his hand to the young princess as she alighted , and
followed the king who went before; they entered a spacious hall , where
they found a splendid collation which the Ogre had prepared for some
friends he had that day expected to visit him; but who , hearing that the
king with the princess and a great gentleman of the court were within , 
had not dared to enter . The king was so much charmed with the amiable
qualities and noble fortune of the marquis of Carabas , and the young
princess too had fallen so violently in love with him , that when the
king had partaken of the collation , and drunk a few glasses of wine , he
said to the marquis:  " It will be you own fault , my lord marquis of
Carabas , if you do not soon become my son-in-law . " The marquis received
the intelligence with a thousand respectful acknowledgments , accepted
the honour conferred upon him , and married the princess that very day . 
The cat became a great lord , and never after ran after rats and mice but
for his amusement . 


