My desire of seeing foreign countries rendered my pleasures at home
unsatisfactory . I therefore arranged my affairs , commenced a voyage to
Persia , and having bought a large stock of goods loaded a ship and again
embarked . The ship struck upon a rock , and the cargo was lost . A few
others and myself were borne by the current to an island , on which we
were surrounded by black savages , and carried to their huts . The savages
offered us herbs; my companions eagerly took them , for they were hungry . 
Grief would not allow me to eat; and presently I saw that the herbs had
made my comrades senseless . Rice , mixed with oil of cocoanuts , was then
offered to us , which my companions ate greedily and grew fat . My unhappy
friends were then devoured one after another , having become appetizing
to the cannibals . But I languished so much that they did not think me
fit to eat . They left me to the care of an old man , from whom I managed
to escape; and taking care to go a contrary way from that which the
savages had taken I never stopped till night . At the end of seven days , 
on the seashore I found a number of white persons gathering pepper . They
asked me in Arabic who I was , and whence I came; and I gave them an
account of the shipwreck , and of my escape . They treated me kindly and
presented me to their King , who treated me with great liberality . During
my stay with them , I observed that when the King and his nobles went
hunting , they rode their horses without bridle or saddle . With the
assistance of some workmen I made a bridle and saddle , and having put
them upon one of the King's horses , presented the animal , thus
equipped , to His Majesty . He was so delighted that he instantly mounted
and rode about the grounds almost the whole day . All the ministers of
state and the nobility induced me to make saddles and bridles for them , 
for which they made me such magnificent presents that I soon became very
rich . The King at last requested that I would marry , and become one of
his nation . From a variety of circumstances I could not refuse , and he
therefore gave me one of the ladies of his Court , who was young , rich , 
beautiful , and virtuous . We lived in the greatest harmony in a palace
belonging to my wife . I had made a good friend of a very worthy man who
lived in this place . Hearing one day that his wife had just died , I went
to condole with him on this unexpected calamity . We were alone together , 
and he appeared to be in the deepest grief . After I had talked with him
some time on the uselessness of so much sorrow , he told me that it was
an established law that the living husband should be buried with the
deceased wife , and that within an hour he must submit . I shuddered at
the dreadful custom . In a short time the woman was attired in her most
costly dress and jewels , and placed in an open coffin . The procession
then began , the husband following the corpse . They ascended to the top
of an exceedingly high mountain , and a great stone was removed , which
covered the mouth of a deep pit . The corpse was let down , and the
husband , having taken leave of his friends , was put into another open
coffin , with a pot of water and seven small loaves , and he was let down . 
The stone was replaced and they all returned . The horror of this was
still fresh upon my mind , when my wife fell sick and died . The King and
the whole Court , out of respect to me , instantly prepared to assist at a
similar ceremony with me . I restrained the feeling of despair until we
arrived at the top of the mountain , when I fell at the feet of the King
and begged him to spare my life . All I said was ineffectual , and after
my wife was let down , I also was put into the deep pit , everyone being
totally indifferent to my cries and lamentations . I made the cave echo
with my vain complaints . I lived some days on the bread and water which
had been put into my coffin , but this supply was at length exhausted . I
then wandered to a remote part of this frightful cave and lay down to
prepare for death . I was thus wishing only for a speedy termination of
my misery , when I heard something walking and panting . I started up , 
upon which the thing panted still more , and then ran away . I pursued it , 
and sometimes it seemed to stop , but on my approach continued to go on
before me . I pursued it , until at last I saw a glimmering light like a
star . This redoubled my eagerness , until at last I discovered a hole
large enough to allow my escape . I crept through the aperture , and found
myself on the seashore , and discovered that the creature was a sea
monster which had been accustomed to enter at that hole to feed upon the
dead bodies . Having eaten some shellfish , I returned to the cave , where
I collected all the jewels I could find in the dark . These I carried to
the seashore , and tied them up very neatly into bales with the cords
that let down the coffins . I laid them on the beach , waiting till some
ship should pass . In two days a ship came out of the harbor , and passed
by that part of the coast . I made a signal , and a boat took me on board . 
I was obliged to say that I had been wrecked; for , had they known my
real story , I should have been carried back , as the captain was a
native of this country . We touched at several islands , and at the port
of Kela , where I found a ship ready to sail for Balsora; and having
presented some jewels to the captain who had brought me to Kela , I
sailed , and at last arrived at Bagdad . 

