Having forgotten my former perils , I built a ship at my own expense , 
loaded it with a rich cargo , and , taking with me other merchants , once
more set sail . We were much driven about by a storm , and at length
landed upon a desert island to search for fresh water . There we found a
roc's egg , equal in size to the one I had seen before . The merchants and
sailors gathered round it , and though I advised them not to meddle with
it , they nevertheless made a hole in it with their hatchets , and picked
out the young roc , piece after piece , and roasted it . They had scarcely
finished when two of the old birds appeared in the air . We hurried on
board ship and set sail , but had not gone far before we saw the immense
birds approaching us , and soon after they hovered over the ship . One of
them let fall an enormous fragment of stone , which fell into the sea
close beside the ship , but the other let fall a piece which split our
ship . I caught hold of a bit of the wreck , on which I was borne by the
wind and tide to an island , the shore of which was very steep . I reached
the dry land , and found the most delicious fruits and excellent water , 
which refreshed me . Farther in the island I saw a feeble old man sitting
near a rivulet . When I enquired of him how he came there , he only
answered by signs for me to carry him over the rivulet , that he might
eat some fruit . I took him on my back , and crossed the brook , but
instead of getting down , he clasped his legs so firmly round my throat
that I thought he would strangle me . I soon fainted with pain and
fright . When I recovered , the old fellow was still sitting on my neck , 
and he quickly made me rise up and walk under the trees , while he
gathered the fruit at his ease . This lasted a long time . One day , while
carrying him about , I picked up a large gourd called a calabash , and , 
having cleared out the inside , I pressed into it the juice of grapes . 
Having filled it , I left it for several days , and at length found that
it became excellent wine . I drank of this , and for a while forgot my
sorrows , so that I began to sing with cheerfulness . The old man made me
give him the calabash , and liking the flavor of the wine , he drank it
off , soon became intoxicated , fell from my shoulders , and , died in
convulsions . I hastened to the seaside , and presently found the crew of
a ship . They told me I had fallen into the hands of the Old Man of the
Sea , and was the first person that had ever escaped . I sailed with them , 
and the captain , when we landed , took me to some persons whose
employment was to gather cocoanuts . We all took up stones and pelted the
monkeys that were at the very top of the cocoanut trees , and these
animals in return pelted us with cocoanuts . When we had obtained as
many as we could carry , we returned to the town . I soon obtained a
considerable sum by the cocoanuts I thus gathered , and at length sailed
for my native land . 
