The Caliph Haroun Alrashid one day sent for me , and told me I must bear
a present to the King of Serindib . I ventured to protest on account of
my age , but I could not persuade him to give up his plan . I arrived at
Serindib , and prayed an audience with the King . I was conducted to the
palace with great respect , and delivered to the monarch the Caliph's
letter and present . The present consisted of the most ingenious and
valuable works of art , with which the King was exceedingly delighted , 
and he was also pleased to acknowledge how much he esteemed my services . 
When I departed , the monarch bestowed on me some rich gifts; but the
ship had not long been at sea , before it was attacked by pirates , who
seized the vessel , and carried us away as slaves . I was sold to a
merchant . When my master found that I could use the bow and arrow with
skill , he took me upon an elephant , and carried me to a vast forest in
the country . My master ordered me to climb a high tree , and wait there
until I saw a troop of elephants pass by . I was then to shoot at them , 
and if one of them fell , I was to go to the city and give the merchant
notice . Having given me these directions , and a bag of provisions , he
left me . On the morning of the second day , I saw a great number of
elephants . I succeeded in shooting one of them , upon which the others
went away , and I returned to the city and told my employer , who praised
my work . We went back to the forest and dug a hole , in which the
elephant was to remain until it decayed and left the teeth free . I
continued this trade nearly two months , and killed an elephant almost
every day . One morning all the elephants came up to the tree in which I
was and trumpeted dreadfully . One of them fastened his trunk round the
tree and tore it up by the roots . I fell with the tree; the animal took
me up with his trunk , and placed me on his back , and then , at the head
of his troop , he brought me to a place where he gently laid me on the
ground , and they all went away . I discovered that I was upon a large
broad hill , covered all over with the bones and teeth of elephants , and
was soon convinced that this was their burying-place . I reached the city
once more; my master thought I was lost , for he had seen the torn tree , 
and found my bow and arrows . I told him what had happened , and led him
to the hill . We loaded the elephant on which we had come , and thus
collected more teeth than a man could have obtained in his whole life . 
The merchant told me that not only he himself , but the whole city , was
indebted to me , and that I should return to my own country with
sufficient wealth to make me happy . My patron loaded a ship with ivory , 
and the other merchants made me valuable presents . I reached Balsora
and landed my ivory , which I found to be more valuable than I had
expected . I set out with caravans to travel overland , and at last
reached Bagdad , where I presented myself to the Caliph , and gave an
account of my embassy . He was so astonished at my adventure with the
elephants that he ordered the narrative of it to be written in letters
of gold and to be deposited in his treasury . 



