In time past--we can not tell exactly how many , many years ago--a poor
Indian was living , with his wife and children , in a beautiful part of
the country . He was not only poor , but he had the misfortune to be
inexpert in procuring food for his family , and his children were all too
young to give him assistance . 

Although of a lowly condition and straitened in his circumstances , he
was a man of kind and contented disposition . He was always thankful to
the Great Spirit for every thing he received . He even stood in the door
of his lodge to bless the birds that flew past in the summer evenings;
although , if he had been of a complaining temper , he might have repined
that they were not rather spread upon the table for his evening meal . 

The same gracious and sweet disposition was inherited by his eldest son , 
who had now arrived at the proper age to undertake the ceremony of the
fast , to learn what kind of a spirit would be his guide and guardian
through life . 

Wunzh , for this was his name , had been an obedient boy from his
infancy--pensive , thoughtful , and gentle--so that he was beloved by the
whole family . 

As soon as the first buds of spring appeared , and the delicious
fragrance of the young year began to sweeten the air , his father , with
the help of his younger brothers , built for Wunzh the customary little
lodge , at a retired spot at some distance from their own , where he would
not be disturbed during the solemn rite . 

To prepare himself , Wunzh sought to clear his heart of every evil
thought , and to think of nothing that was not good , and beautiful , and
kindly . 

That he might store his mind with pleasant ideas for his dreams , for the
first few days he amused himself by walking in the woods and over the
mountains , examining the early plants and flowers . 

As he rambled far and wide , through the wild country , he felt a strong
desire to know how the plants and herbs and berries grew , without any
aid from man , and why it was that some kinds were good to eat , and that
others were possessed of medicinal or poisonous power . 

After he had become too languid to walk about , and confined himself
strictly to the lodge , he recalled these thoughts , and turning them in
his mind , he wished he could dream of something that would prove a
benefit to his father and family , and to all others of his
fellow-creatures . 

"True , " thought Wunzh , "the Great Spirit made all things , and it is to
him that we owe our lives . Could he not make it easier for us to get our
food , than by hunting animals and taking fish ? I must try to find this
out in my visions . "

On the third day Wunzh became weak and faint , and kept his bed . Suddenly
he fancied , as he lay thus , that a bright light came in at the lodge
door , and ere he was aware , he saw a handsome young man , with a
complexion of the softest and purest white , coming down from the sky , 
and advancing toward him . 

The beautiful stranger was richly and gayly dressed , having on a great
many garments of green and yellow colors , but differing in their deeper
or lighter shades . He had a plume of waving feathers on his head , and
all his motions were graceful , and reminded Wunzh of the deep green of
the summer grass , and the clear amber of the summer sky , and the gentle
blowing of the summer wind . Beautiful as the stranger was , he paused on
a little mound of earth , just before the door of the lodge . 

"I am sent to you , my friend , " said this celestial visitor , in a voice
most soft and musical to listen to , "I am sent to you by that Great
Spirit who made all things in the sky , and on the earth . He has seen and
knows your motives in fasting . He sees that it is from a kind and
benevolent wish to do good to your people , and to procure a benefit for
them; that you do not seek for strength in war , or the praise of the men
of the bloody hand . I am sent to instruct you and to show you how you
can do your kindred good . "

He then told the young man to arise , and to prepare to wrestle with him , 
as it was only by this means that he could hope to succeed in his
wishes . 

Wunzh knew how weak he was from fasting , but the voice of the stranger
was cheery , and put such a courage in his heart , that he promptly sprang
up , determined to die rather than fail . Brave Wunzh ! if you ever
accomplish any thing , it will be through the power of the resolve that
spake within you at that moment . 

He began the trial , and after a long-sustained struggle he was almost
overpowered , when the beautiful stranger said:

"My friend , it is enough for once , I will come again to try you;" and
smiling on him , he returned through the air in the same direction in
which he had come . 

The next day , although he saw how sweetly the wild-flowers bloomed upon
the slopes , and the birds warbled from the woodland , he longed to see
the celestial visitor , and to hear his voice . 

To his great joy he reappeared at the same hour , toward the going down
of the sun , and re-challenged Wunzh to a trial of strength . 

The brave Wunzh felt that his strength of body was even less than on the
day before , but the courage of his mind seemed to grow . Observing this , 
and how Wunzh put his whole heart in the struggle , the stranger again
spoke to him in the words he used before , adding:

"To-morrow will be your last trial . Be strong , my friend , for this is
the only way in which you can overcome me and obtain the boon you seek . "

The light which shone after him as he left Wunzh was brighter than
before . 

On the third day he came again and renewed the struggle . Very faint in
body was poor Wunzh , but he was stronger at heart than ever , and
determined to prevail now or perish . He put forth his utmost powers , and
after a contest more severe than either of the others , the stranger
ceased his efforts , and declared himself conquered . 

For the first time he entered Wunzh's little fasting-lodge , and sitting
down beside the youth , he began to deliver his instructions to him and
to inform him in what manner he should proceed to take advantage of his
victory . 

"You have won your desire of the Great Spirit , " said the beautiful
stranger . "You have wrestled manfully . To-morrow will be the seventh day
of your fasting . Your father will give you food to strengthen you , and
as it is the last day of trial you will prevail . I know this , and now
tell you what you must do to benefit your family and your people . 
To-morrow , " he repeated , "I shall meet you and wrestle with you for the
last time . As soon as you have prevailed against me , you will strip off
my garments and throw me down , clean the earth of roots and weeds , make
it soft , and bury me in the spot . When you have done this , leave my body
in the earth , and do not disturb it , but come at times to visit the
place , to see whether I have come to life , and above all be careful to
never let the grass or weeds grow upon my grave . Once a month cover me
with fresh earth . If you follow these my instructions you will
accomplish your object of doing good to your fellow-creatures by
teaching them the knowledge I now teach you . "

He then shook Wunzh by the hand and disappeared , but he was gone so soon
that Wunzh could not tell what direction he took . 

In the morning , Wunzh's father came to his lodge with some slight
refreshments , saying:

"My son , you have fasted long enough . If the Great Spirit will favor
you , he will do it now . It is seven days since you have tasted food , and
you must not sacrifice your life . The Master of Life does not require
that . "

"My father , " replied Wunzh , "wait till the sun goes down . I have a
particular reason for extending my fast to that hour . "

"Very well , " said the old man , "I shall wait till the hour arrives , and
you shall be inclined to eat . "

At his usual hour of appearing , the beautiful sky-visitor returned , and
the trial of strength was renewed . Although he had not availed himself
of his father's offer of food , Wunzh felt that new strength had been
given him . His heart was mighty within him to achieve some great
purpose . Courage was like the eagle that spreads his wings within the
tree-top for a great flight , within the bosom of the brave Wunzh . 

He grasped his angel challenger with supernatural strength , threw him
down , and , mindful of his own instructions , tore from him his beautiful
garments and plume , and finding him dead , he immediately buried him on
the spot , using all the precautions he had been told of , and very
confident was Wunzh , all the time , that his friend would again come to
life . 

Wunzh now returned to his father's lodge , where he was warmly welcomed , 
for as it had been appointed to him during the days of his fasting to
walk apart with Heaven , he was not permitted to see any human face save
that of his father , the representative to the little household upon
earth of the Good Father who is in Heaven . 

Wunzh partook sparingly of the meal that had been prepared for him , and
once more mingled in the cares and sports of the family . But he never
for a moment forgot the grave of his friend . He carefully visited it
throughout the spring , and weeded out the grass , and kept the ground in
a soft and pliant state; and sometimes , when the brave Wunzh thought of
his friend that was gone from his sight , he dropped a tear upon the
earth where he lay . 

Watching and tending , and moistening the earth with his tears , it was
not long before Wunzh saw the tops of green plumes coming through the
ground; and the more faithful he was in obeying his instructions in
keeping the ground in order , and in cherishing the memory of his
departed friend , the faster they grew . He was , however , careful to
conceal the charge of the earth which he had from his father . 

Days and weeks had passed in this way; the summer was drawing toward a
close , when one day , after a long absence in hunting , Wunzh invited his
father to follow him to the quiet and lonesome spot of his former fast . 

The little fasting-lodge had been removed , and the weeds kept from
growing on the circle where it had stood; but in its place rose a tall
and graceful plant , surmounted with nodding plumes and stately leaves , 
and golden clusters . There was in its aspect and bearing the deep green
of the summer grass , the clear amber of the summer sky , and the gentle
blowing of the summer wind . 

"It is my friend ! " shouted Wunzh , "it is the friend of all mankind . It
is Mondawmin: it is our Indian Corn ! We need no longer rely on hunting
alone , for as long as this gift is cherished and taken care of , the
ground itself will give us a living . "

He then pulled an ear . 

"See , my father , " said he , "this is what I fasted for . The Great Spirit
has listened to my voice , and sent us something new , and henceforth our
people will not alone depend upon the chase or upon the waters . "

Wunzh then communicated to his father the instructions given to him by
the stranger . He told him that the broad husks must be torn away , as he
had pulled off the garments in his wrestling , and having done this , he
directed him how the ear must be held before the fire till the outer
skin became brown--as he complexion of his angel friend had been tinted
by the sun--while all the milk was retained in the grain . 

The whole family , in high spirits , and deeply grateful to the Merciful
Master who gave it , assisted in a feast on the newly-grown ears of corn . 

So came that mighty blessing into the world , and we owe all of those
beautiful fields of healthful grain to the dream of the brave boy Wunzh . ﻿Hans had served his Master seven years , and at the end of that time he
said to him: "Master , since my time is up , I should like to go home to
my mother; so give me my wages , if you please . "

His Master replied , "You have served me truly and honestly , Hans , and
such as your service was , such shall be your reward;" and with these
words he gave him a lump of gold as big as his head . Hans thereupon took
his handkerchief out of his pocket , and , wrapping the gold up in it , 
threw it over his shoulder and set out on the road toward his native
village . As he went along , carefully setting one foot to the ground
before the other , a horseman came in sight , trotting gaily and briskly
along upon a capital animal . "Ah , " said Hans , aloud , "what a fine thing
that riding is ! one is seated , as it were , upon a stool , kicks against
no stones , spares one's shoes , and gets along without any trouble ! "

The Rider , overhearing Hans making these reflections , stopped and said , 
"Why , then , do you travel on foot , my fine fellow ? "

"Because I am forced , " replied Hans , "for I have got a bit of a lump to
carry home; it certainly is gold , but then I can't carry my head
straight , and it hurts my shoulder . "

"If you like we will exchange , " said the Rider . "I will give you my
horse , and you can give me your lump of gold . "

"With all my heart , " cried Hans; "but I tell you fairly you undertake a
very heavy burden . "

The man dismounted , took the gold , and helped Hans on to the horse , and , 
giving him the reins into his hands , said , "Now , when you want to go
faster , you must chuckle with your tongue and cry , 'Gee up ! gee up ! '"

Hans was delighted indeed when he found himself on the top of a horse , 
and riding along so freely and gaily . After a while he thought he should
like to go rather quicker , and so he cried , "Gee up ! gee up ! " as the man
had told him . The horse soon set off at a hard trot , and , before Hans
knew what he was about , he was thrown over head and heels into a ditch
which divided the fields from the road . The horse , having accomplished
this feat , would have bolted off if he had not been stopped by a Peasant
who was coming that way , driving a cow before him . Hans soon picked
himself up on his legs , but he was terribly put out , and said to the
countryman , "That is bad sport , that riding , especially when one mounts
such a beast as that , which stumbles and throws one off so as to nearly
break one's neck . I will never ride on that animal again . Commend me to
your cow: one may walk behind her without any discomfort , and besides
one has , every day for certain , milk , butter , and cheese . Ah ! what would
I not give for such a cow ! "

"Well , " said the Peasant , "such an advantage you may soon enjoy; I will
exchange my cow for your horse . "

To this Hans consented with a thousand thanks , and the Peasant , swinging
himself upon the horse , rode off in a hurry . 

Hans now drove his cow off steadily before him , thinking of his lucky
bargain in this wise: "I have a bit of bread , and I can , as often as I
please , eat with it butter and cheese , and when I am thirsty I can milk
my cow and have a draught: and what more can I desire ? "

As soon , then , as he came to an inn he halted , and ate with great
satisfaction all the bread he had brought with him for his noonday and
evening meals , and washed it down with a glass of beer , to buy which he
spent his two last farthings . This over , he drove his cow farther , but
still in the direction of his mother's village . The heat meantime became
more and more oppressive as noontime approached , and just then Hans came
to a common which was an hour's journey across . Here he got into such a
state of heat that his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth , and he
thought to himself: "This won't do; I will just milk my cow , and refresh
myself . " Hans , therefore tied her to a stump of a tree , and , having no
pail , placed his leathern cap below , and set to work , but not a drop of
milk could he squeeze out . He had placed himself , too , very awkwardly , 
and at last the impatient cow gave him such a kick on the head that he
tumbled over on the ground , and for a long time knew not where he was . 
Fortunately , not many hours after , a Butcher passed by , trundling a
young pig along upon a wheelbarrow . "What trick is this ! " exclaimed he , 
helping up poor Hans; and Hans told him that all that had passed . The
Butcher then handed him his flask and said , "There , take a drink; it
will revive you . Your cow might well give no milk: she is an old beast , 
and worth nothing at the best but for the plough or the butcher ! "

"Eh ! eh ! " said Hans , pulling his hair over his eyes , "who would have
thought it ? It is all very well when one can kill a beast like that at
home , and make a profit of the flesh; but for my part I have no relish
for cow's flesh; it is too tough for me ! Ah ! a young pig like yours is
the thing that tastes something like , let alone the sausages ! "

"Well now , for love of you , " said the Butcher , "I will make an exchange , 
and let you have my pig for your cow . "

"Heaven reward you for your kindness ! " cried Hans; and , giving up the
cow , he untied the pig from the barrow and took into his hands the
string with which it was tied . 

Hans walked on again , considering how everything had happened just as he
wished , and how all his vexations had turned out for the best after all ! 
Presently a boy overtook him carrying a fine white goose under his arm , 
and after they had said "Good-day" to each other , Hans began to talk
about his luck , and what profitable exchanges he had made . The Boy on
his part told him that he was carrying the goose to a christening-feast . 
"Just lift it , " said he to Hans , holding it up by its wings , "just feel
how heavy it is; why , it has been fattened up for the last eight weeks , 
and whoever bites it when it is cooked will have to wipe the grease from
each side of his mouth ! "

"Yes , " said Hans , weighing it with one hand , "it is weighty , but my pig
is no trifle either . "

While he was speaking the Boy kept looking about on all sides , and
shaking his head suspiciously , and at length he broke out , "I am afraid
it is not all right about your pig . In the village through which I have
just come , one has been stolen out of the sty of the mayor himself; and
I am afraid , very much afraid , you have it now in your hand ! They have
sent out several people , and it would be a very bad job for you if they
found you with the pig; the best thing you can do is to hide it in some
dark corner ! "

Honest Hans was thunderstruck , and exclaimed , "Ah , Heaven help me in
this fresh trouble ! you know the neighbourhood better than I do; do you
take my pig and let me have your goose , " said he to the boy . 

"I shall have to hazard something at that game , " replied the Boy , "but
still I do not wish to be the cause of your meeting with misfortune;"
and , so saying , he took the rope into his own hand , and drove the pig
off quickly by a side-path , while Hans , lightened of his cares , walked
on homeward with the goose under his arm . "If I judge rightly , " thought
he to himself , "I have gained even by this exchange: first there is a
good roast; then the quantity of fat which will drip out will make goose
broth for a quarter of a year; and then there are fine white feathers , 
which , when once I have put into my pillow I warrant I shall sleep
without rocking . What pleasure my mother will have ! "

As he came to the last village on his road there stood a Knife-grinder , 
with his barrow by the hedge , whirling his wheel round and singing:

 "Scissors and razors and such-like I grind;
 And gaily my rags are flying behind . "

Hans stopped and looked at him , and at last he said , "You appear to have
a good business , if I may judge by your merry song ? "

"Yes , " answered the Grinder , "this business has a golden bottom ! A true
knife-grinder is a man who as often as he puts his hand into his pocket
feels money in it ! But what a fine goose you have got; where did you buy
it ? "

"I did not buy it at all , " said Hans , "but took it in exchange for my
pig . " "And the pig ? " "I exchanged for my cow . " "And the cow ? " "I
exchanged a horse for her . " "And the horse ? " "For him I gave a lump of
gold as big as my head . " "And the gold ? " "That was my wages for a seven
years' servitude . " "And I see you have known how to benefit yourself
each time , " said the Grinder; "but , could you now manage that you heard
the money rattling in your pocket as you walked , your fortune would be
made . "

"Well ! how shall I manage that ? " asked Hans . 

"You must become a grinder like me; to this trade nothing peculiar
belongs but a grindstone; the other necessaries find themselves . Here is
one which is a little worn , certainly , and so I will not ask anything
more for it than your goose; are you agreeable ? "

"How can you ask me ? " said Hans; "why , I shall be the luckiest man in
the world; having money as often as I dip my hand into my pocket , what
have I to care about any longer ? "

So saying , he handed over the goose , and received the grindstone in
exchange . 

"Now , " said the Grinder , picking up an ordinary big flint stone which
lay near , "now , there you have a capital stone upon which only beat them
long enough and you may straighten all your old nails ! Take it , and use
it carefully ! "

Hans took the stone and walked on with a satisfied heart , his eyes
glistening with joy . "I must have been born , " said he , "to a heap of
luck; everything happens just as I wish , as if I were a Sunday-child . "

Soon , however , having been on his legs since daybreak , he began to feel
very tired , and was plagued too with hunger , since he had eaten all his
provision at once in his joy about the cow bargain . At last he felt
quite unable to go farther , and was forced , too , to halt every minute
for the stones encumbered him very much . Just then the thought overcame
him , what a good thing it were if he had no need to carry them any
longer , and at the same moment he came up to a stream . Here he resolved
to rest and refresh himself with drink , and so that the stones might not
hurt him in kneeling he laid them carefully down by his side on the
bank . This done , he stooped down to scoop up some water in his hand , and
then it happened that he pushed one stone a little too far , so that both
presently went plump into the water . Hans , as soon as he saw them
sinking to the bottom , jumped up for joy , and then kneeled down and
returned thanks , with tears in his eyes , that so mercifully , and without
any act on his part , and in so nice a way , he had been delivered from
the heavy stones , which alone hindered him from getting on . 

"So lucky as I am , " exclaimed Hans , "is no other man under the sun ! "

Then with a light heart , and free from every burden , he leaped gaily
along till he reached his mother's house . 


