It is a common saying among men that to forget favours received is the
part of a bird or a beast: an ungrateful man will be ill spoken of by
all the world . And yet even birds and beasts will show gratitude; so
that a man who does not requite a favour is worse even than dumb brutes . 
Is not this a disgrace ? 

Once upon a time , in a hut at a place called Namékata , in Hitachi , there
lived an old priest famous neither for learning nor wisdom , but bent
only on passing his days in prayer and meditation . He had not even a
child to wait upon him , but prepared his food with his own hands . Night
and morning he recited the prayer "Namu Amida Butsu , "[3] intent upon
that alone . Although the fame of his virtue did not reach far , yet his
neighbours respected and revered him , and often brought him food and
raiment; and when his roof or his walls fell out of repair , they would
mend them for him; so for the things of this world he took no thought . 

One very cold night , when he little thought any one was outside , he
heard a voice calling , "Your reverence ! your reverence ! " So he rose and
went out to see who it was , and there he beheld an old badger standing . 
Any ordinary man would have been greatly alarmed at the apparition; but
the priest , being such as he has been described above , showed no sign of
fear , but asked the creature its business . Upon this the badger
respectfully bent its knees and said:

"Hitherto , sir , my lair has been in the mountains , and of snow or frost
I have taken no heed; but now I am growing old , and this severe cold is
more than I can bear . I pray you to let me enter and warm myself at the
fire of your cottage , that I may live through this bitter night . "

When the priest heard what a helpless state the beast was reduced to , he
was filled with pity and said:

"That's a very slight matter: make haste and come in and warm yourself . "

The badger , delighted with so good a reception , went into the hut , and
squatting down by the fire began to warm itself; and the priest , with
renewed fervour , recited his prayers and struck his bell before the
image of Buddha , looking straight before him . 

After two hours the badger took its leave , with profuse expressions of
thanks , and went out; and from that time forth it came every night to
the hut . As the badger would collect and bring with it dried branches
and dead leaves from the hills for firewood , the priest at last became
very friendly with it , and got used to its company; so that if ever , as
the night wore on , the badger did not arrive , he used to miss it , and
wonder why it did not come . When the winter was over , and the springtime
came at the end of the second month , the badger gave up its visits , and
was no more seen; but , on the return of the winter , the beast resumed
its old habit of coming to the hut . When this practice had gone on for
ten years , one day the badger said to the priest , "Through your
reverence's kindness for all these years , I have been able to pass the
winter nights in comfort . Your favours are such that during all my life , 
and even after my death , I must remember them . What can I do to requite
them ? If there is anything that you wish for , pray tell me . "

The priest , smiling at this speech , answered: "Being such as I am , I
have no desire and no wishes . Glad as I am to hear your kind intentions , 
there is nothing that I can ask you to do for me . You need feel no
anxiety on my account . As long as I live , when the winter comes , you
shall be welcome here . " The badger , on hearing this , could not conceal
its admiration of the depth of the old man's benevolence; but having so
much to be grateful for , it felt hurt at not being able to requite it . 
As this subject was often renewed between them , the priest at last , 
touched by the goodness of the badger's heart , said: "Since I have
shaven my head , renounced the world , and forsaken the pleasures of this
life , I have no desire to gratify , yet I own I should like to possess
three riyos in gold . Food and raiment I receive by the favour of the
villagers , so I take no heed for those things . Were I to die to-morrow , 
and attain my wish of being born again into the next world , the same
kind folk have promised to meet and bury my body . Thus , although I have
no other reason to wish for money , still if I had three riyos I would
offer them up at some holy shrine , that masses and prayers might be said
for me , whereby I might enter into salvation . Yet I would not get this
money by violent or unlawful means; I only think of what might be if I
had it . So you see , since you have expressed such kind feelings toward
me , I have told you what is on my mind . " When the priest had done
speaking , the badger leant its head on one side with a puzzled and
anxious look , so much so that the old man was sorry he had expressed a
wish which seemed to give the beast trouble , and tried to retract what
he had said . "Posthumous honours , after all , are the wish of ordinary
men . I , who am a priest , ought not to entertain such thoughts , or to
want money; so pray pay no attention to what I have said;" and the
badger , feigning assent to what the priest had impressed upon it , 
returned to the hills as usual . 

From that time forth the badger came no more to the hut . The priest
thought this very strange , but imagined either that the badger stayed
away because it did not like to come without the money , or that it had
been killed in an attempt to steal it; and he blamed himself for having
added to his sins for no purpose , repenting when it was too late:
persuaded , however , that the badger must have been killed , he passed his
time in putting up prayers upon prayers for it . 

After three years had gone by , one night the old man heard a voice near
his door calling out , "Your reverence ! your reverence ! "

As the voice was like that of the badger , he jumped up as soon as he
heard it , and ran to open the door; and there , sure enough , was the
badger . The priest , in great delight , cried out: "And so you are safe
and sound , after all ! Why have you been so long without coming here ? I
have been expecting you anxiously this long while . "

So the badger came into the hut and said: "If the money which you
required had been for unlawful purposes , I could easily have procured as
much as ever you might have wanted; but when I heard that it was to be
offered to a temple for masses for your soul , I thought that , if I were
to steal the hidden treasure of some other man , you could not apply to a
sacred purpose money which had been obtained at the expense of his
sorrow . So I went to the island of Sado , [4] and gathering the sand and
earth which had been cast away as worthless by the miners , fused it
afresh in the fire; and at this work I spent months and days . " As the
badger finished speaking , the priest looked at the money which it had
produced , and sure enough he saw that it was bright and new and clean;
so he took the money , and received it respectfully , raising it to his
head . 

"And so you have had all this toil and labour on account of a foolish
speech of mine ? I have obtained my heart's desire , and am truly
thankful . "

As he was thanking the badger with great politeness and ceremony , the
beast said: "In doing this I have but fulfilled my own wish; still I
hope that you will tell this thing to no man . "

"Indeed , " replied the priest , "I cannot choose but tell this story . For
if I keep this money in my poor hut , it will be stolen by thieves: I
must either give it to some one to keep for me , or else at once offer it
up at the temple . And when I do this , when people see a poor old priest
with a sum of money quite unsuited to his station , they will think it
very suspicious , and I shall have to tell the tale as it occurred; but I
shall say that the badger that gave me the money has ceased coming to my
hut , you need not fear being waylaid , but can come , as of old , and
shelter yourself from the cold . " To this the badger nodded assent; and
as long as the old priest lived , it came and spent the winter nights
with him . 

From this story , it is plain that even beasts have a sense of gratitude:
in this quality dogs excel all other beasts . Is not the story of the dog
of Totoribé Yorodzu written in the Annals of Japan ? I[5] have heard that
many anecdotes of this nature have been collected and printed in a book , 
which I have not yet seen; but as the facts which I have recorded relate
to a badger , they appear to me to be passing strange . 

:

[ 3: A Buddhist prayer , in which something approaching to the
sounds of the original Sanscrit has been preserved . The meaning of the
prayer is explained as , "Save us , eternal Buddha'" Many even of the
priests who repeat it know it only as a formula , without understanding
it . ]

[ 4: An island on the west coast of Japan , famous for its gold
mines . ]

[ 5: The author of the tale . ]


