On a certain lake there once lived a Neck , or Water Sprite , who
desired , above all things , to obtain a human soul . Now when the sun
shone this Neck rose up and sat upon the waves and played upon his
harp . And he played so sweetly that the winds stayed to listen to him , 
and the sun lingered in his setting , and the moon rose before her
time . And the strain was in praise of immortality . 

Furthermore , out of the lake there rose a great rock , whereon dwelt an
aged hermit , who by reason of his loneliness was afflicted with a
spirit of melancholy; so that when the fit was on him , he was
constantly tempted to throw himself into the water , for his life was
burdensome to him . But one day , when this gloomy madness had driven
him to the edge of the rock to cast himself down , the Neck rose at the
same moment , and sitting upon a wave , began to play . And the strain
was in praise of immortality . And the melody went straight to the
heart of the hermit as a sunbeam goes into a dark cave , and it
dispelled his gloom , and he thought all to be as well with him as
before it had seemed ill . And he called to the Neck and said , "What is
that which thou dost play , my son ? "

And the Neck answered , "It is in praise of immortality . "

Then said the hermit , "I beg that thou wilt play frequently beneath
this rock; for I am an aged and solitary man , and by reason of my
loneliness , life becomes a burden to me , and I am tempted to throw it
away . But by this gracious strain the evil has been dispelled . 
Wherefore I beg thee to come often and to play as long as is
convenient . And yet I cannot offer thee any reward , for I am poor and
without possessions . "

Then the Neck replied , "There are treasures below the water as above , 
and I desire no earthly riches . But if thou canst tell me how I may
gain a human soul , I will play on till thou shalt bid me cease . "

And the hermit said , "I must consider the matter . But I will return
to-morrow at this time and answer thee . "

Then the next day he returned as he had said , and the Neck was
waiting impatiently on the lake , and he cried , "What news , my father ? "

And the hermit said , "If that at any time some human being will freely
give his life for thee , thou wilt gain a human soul . But thou also
must die the selfsame day . "

"The short life for the long one ! " cried the Neck; and he played a
melody so full of happiness that the blood danced through the hermit's
veins as if he were a boy again . But the next day when he came as
usual the Neck called to him and said , "My father , I have been
thinking . Thou art aged and feeble , and at the most there are but few
days of life remaining to thee . Moreover , by reason of thy loneliness
even these are a burden . Surely there is none more fit than thou to be
the means of procuring me a human soul . Wherefore I beg of thee , let
us die to-day . "

But the hermit cried out angrily , "Wretch ! Is this thy gratitude ? 
Wouldst thou murder me ? "

"Nay , old man , " replied the Neck , "thou shalt part easily with thy
little fag-end of life . I can play upon my harp a strain of such
surpassing sadness that no human heart that hears it but must break . 
And yet the pain of that heartbreak shall be such that thou wilt not
know it from rapture . Moreover , when the sun sets below the water , my
spirit also will depart without suffering . Wherefore I beg of thee , 
let us die to-day . "

"Truly , " said the hermit , "it is because thou art only a Neck , and
nothing better , that thou dost not know the value of human life . "

"And art thou a man , possessed already of a soul , and destined for
immortality , " cried the Neck , "and dost haggle and grudge to benefit
me by the sacrifice of a few uncertain days , when it is but to
exchange them for the life that knows no end ? "

"Our days are always uncertain , " replied the hermit; "but existence is
very sweet , even to the most wretched . Moreover , I see not that thou
hast any claim upon mine . " Saying which he returned to his cell , but
the Neck , flinging aside his harp , sat upon the water , and wept
bitterly . 

Days passed , and the hermit did not show himself , and at last the Neck
resolved to go and visit him . So he took his harp , and taking also the
form of a boy with long fair hair and a crimson cap , he appeared in
the hermit's cell . There he found the old man stretched upon his
pallet , for lie was dying . When he saw the Neck he was glad , and said , 
"I have desired to see thee , for I repent myself that I did not
according to thy wishes . Yet is the desire of life stronger in the
human breast than thou canst understand . Nevertheless I am sorry , and
I am sorry also that , as I am sick unto death , my life will no longer
avail thee . But when I am dead , do thou take all that belongs to me , 
and dress thyself in my robe , and go out into the world , and do works
of mercy , and perchance some one whom thou hast benefited will be
found willing to die with thee , that thou mayst obtain a soul . "

"Now indeed I thank thee ! " cried the Neck . "But yet one word
more--what are these works of which thou speakest ? "

"The corporal works of mercy are seven , " gasped the hermit , raising
himself on his arm . "To feed the hungry and give the thirsty drink , to
visit the sick , to redeem captives , to clothe the naked , to shelter
the stranger and the houseless , to visit the widow and fatherless , and
to bury the dead . " Then even as he spoke the last words the hermit
died . And the Neck clothed himself in his robe , and , not to delay in
following the directions given to him , he buried the hermit with pious
care , and planted flowers upon his grave . After which he went forth
into the world . 

Now for three hundred years did the Neck go about doing acts of mercy
and charity towards men . And amongst the hungry , and the naked , and
the sick , and the poor , and the captives , there were not a few who
seemed to be weary of this life of many sorrows . But when he had fed
the hungry , and clothed the naked , and relieved the sick , and made
the poor rich , and set the captive free , life was too dear to all of
them to be given up . Therefore he betook himself to the most miserable
amongst men , and offering nothing but an easy death in a good cause , 
he hoped to find some aged and want-worn creature who would do him the
kindness he desired . But of those who must look forward to the fewest
days and to the most misery there was not one but , like the fabled
woodcutter , chose to trudge out to the end his miserable span . 

So when three hundred years were past , the Neck's heart failed him , 
and he said , "All this avails nothing . Wherefore I will return to the
lake , and there abide what shall befall . " And this he accordingly did . 

Now one evening there came a tempest down from the hills , and there
was a sudden squall on the lake . And a certain young man in a boat
upon the lake was overtaken by the storm . And as he struggled hard , 
and it seemed as if every moment must be his last , a young maid who
was his sweetheart came down to the shore , and cried aloud in her
agony , "Alas , that his young life should be cut short thus ! "

"Trouble not thyself , " said the Neck; "this life is so short and so
uncertain , that if he were rescued to-day he might be taken from thee
to-morrow . Only in eternity is love secure . Wherefore be patient , and
thou shalt soon follow him . "

"And who art thou that mockest my sorrow ? " cried the maiden . 

"One who has watched the passing misfortunes of many generations
before thine , " replied the Neck . 

And when the maiden looked , and saw one like a little old man wringing
out his beard into the lake , she knew it was a Neck , and cried , "Now
surely thou art a Neck , and they say , 'When Necks play , the winds
wisht;' wherefore I beg of thee to play upon thy harp , and it may be
that the storm will lull , and my beloved will be saved . "

But the Neck answered , "It is not worth while . "

And when the maiden could not persuade him , she fell upon her face in
bitter grief , and cried , "Oh , my Beloved ! Would GOD I could die for
thee ! "

"And yet thou wouldst not if thou couldst , " said the Neck . 

"If it be in thy power to prove me--prove me ! " cried the maiden; "for
indeed he is the only stay of aged parents , and he is young and
unprepared for death . Moreover his life is dearer to me than my own . "

Then the Neck related his own story , and said , "If thou wilt do this
for me , which none yet has done whom I have benefited , I will play
upon my harp , and if the winds wisht , thou must die this easy death;
but if I fail in my part , I shall not expect thine to be fulfilled . 
And we must both abide what shall befall , even as others . " And to this
the maiden consented most willingly . Only she said , "Do this for me , I
beg of thee . Let him come so near that I may just see his face before
I die . " And it was so agreed . 

Then the aged Neck drew forth his harp and began to play . And as he
played the wind stayed , as one who pauses to hearken with cleft lips , 
and the lake rose and fell gently , like the bosom of a girl moved by
some plaintive song , and the sun burst forth as if to see who made
such sweet music . And so through this happy change the young man got
safe to land . Then the Neck turned to the maiden and said , "Dost thou
hold to thy promise ? " And she bowed her head . 

"In the long life be thy recompense ! " cried the Neck , fervently , and
taking his harp again , he poured his whole spirit into the strain . And
as he played , it seemed as if the night wind moaned among pine-trees , 
but it was more mournful . And it was as the wail of a mother for her
only son , and yet fuller of grief . Or like a Dead March wrung from the
heart of a great musician--loading the air with sorrow--and yet all
these were as nothing to it for sadness . And when the maiden heard it , 
it was more than she could bear , and her heart broke , as the Neck had
said . Then the young man sprang to shore , and when she could see his
face clearly , her soul passed , and her body fell like a snapped flower
to the earth . 

Now when the young man knew what was befallen , he fell upon the Neck
to kill him , who said , "Thou mayest spare thyself this trouble , for in
a few moments I shall be dead . But do thou take my robe and my harp , 
and thou shalt be a famous musician . "

Now even as the Neck spoke the sun sank , and he fell upon his face . 
And when the young man lifted the robe , behold there was nothing under
it but the harp , across which there swept such a wild and piteous
chord that all the strings burst as if with unutterable grief . 

Then the young man lifted the body of his sweetheart in his arms , and
carried her home , and she was buried with many tears . 

And in due time he put fresh strings to the harp , which , though it was
not as when it was in the hands of the Neck , yet it made most
exquisite music . And the young man became a famous musician . For out
of suffering comes song . 

Furthermore , he occupied himself in good works until that his time
also came . 

 * * * * *

And in Eternity Love was made secure . 


