Long ago there lived a cobbler who had very poor wits , but by strict
industry he could earn enough to keep himself and his widowed mother
in comfort . 

In this manner he had lived for many years in peace and prosperity , 
when a distant relative died who left him a certain sum of money . This
so elated the cobbler that he could think of nothing else , and his
only talk was of the best way of spending the legacy . 

His mother advised him to lay it by against a rainy day . 

 " For , " said she ,  " we have lived long in much comfort as we are , and
have need of nothing; but when you grow old , or if it should please
Heaven that you become disabled , you will then be glad of your
savings . " 

But to this the cobbler would not listen .  " No , " said he ,  " if we save
the money it may be stolen , but if we spend it well , we shall have
the use of what we buy , and may sell it again if we are so minded . " 

He then proposed one purchase after another , and each was more foolish
than the rest . When this had gone on for some time , one morning he
exclaimed:  " I have it at last ! We will buy the house . It cannot be
stolen or lost , and when it is ours we shall have no rent to pay , and
I shall not have to work so hard . " 

 " He will never hit on a wiser plan than that , " thought the widow;  " it
is not to be expected . " So she fully consented to this arrangement , 
which was duly carried out; and the bargain left the cobbler with a
few shillings , which he tied up in a bag and put in his pocket , having
first changed them into pence , that they might make more noise when he
jingled the bag as he walked down the street . 

Presently he said;  " It is not fit that a man who lives in his own
house , and has ready money in his pocket too , should spend the whole
day in labouring with his hands . Since by good luck I can read , it
would be well that I should borrow a book from the professor , for
study is an occupation suitable to my present position . " 

Accordingly , he went to the professor , whom he found seated in his
library , and preferred his request . 

 " What book do you want ? " asked the professor . 

The cobbler stood and scratched his head thoughtfully . The professor
thought that he was trying to recall the name of the work; but in
reality he was saying to himself:  " How much additional knowledge one
requires if he has risen ever so little in life ! Now , if I did but
know where it is proper to begin in a case full of books like this ! 
Should one take the first on the top shelf , or the bottom shelf , to
the left , or to the right ? " 

At last he resolved to choose the book nearest to him; so drawing it
out from the rest , he answered--

 " This one , if it please you , learned sir . " The professor lent it to
him , and he took it home and began to read . 

It was , as it happened , a book about ghosts and apparitions; and the
cobbler ' s mind was soon so full of these marvels that he could talk of
nothing else , and hardly did a stroke of work for reading and
pondering over what he read . He could find none of his neighbours who
had seen a ghost , though most had heard of such things , and many
believed in them . 

 " Live and learn , " thought the cobbler;  " here is fame as well as
wealth . If I could but see a ghost there would be no more to desire . " 
And with this intent he sallied forth late one night to the
churchyard . 

Meanwhile a thief  ( who had heard the jingle of his money-bag ) 
resolved to profit by the cobbler ' s whim; so wrapping himself in a
sheet , he laid wait for him in a field that he must cross to reach the
church . 

When the cobbler saw the white figure , he made sure , that he had now
seen a ghost , and already felt proud of his own acquaintance , as a
remarkable character . Meanwhile , the thief stood quite still , and the
cobbler walked boldly up to him , expecting that the phantom would
either vanish or prove so impalpable that he could pass through it as
through a mist , of which he had read many notable instances in the
professor ' s book . He soon found out his mistake , however , for the
supposed ghost grappled him , and without loss of time relieved him of
his money-bag . The cobbler  ( who was not wanting in courage ) fastened
as tightly on to the sheet , which he still held with desperate
firmness when the thief had slipped through his fingers; and after
waiting in vain for further marvels , he carried the sheet home to his
mother , and narrated his encounter with the ghost . 

 " Alack-a-day ! that I should have a son with so little wit ! " cried the
old woman;  " it was no ghost , but a thief , who is now making merry with
all the money we possessed . " 

 " We have his sheet , " replied her son;  " and that is due solely to my
determination . How could I have acted better ? " 

 " You should have grasped the man , not the sheet , " said the widow , 
 " and pummelled him till he cried out and dropped the money-bag . " 

 " Live and learn , " said the cobbler . The next night he went out as
before , and this time reached the churchyard unmolested . He was just
climbing the stile , when he again saw what seemed to be a white figure
standing near the church . As before , it proved solid , and this time he
pummelled it till his fingers bled , and for very weariness he was
obliged to go home and relate his exploits . The ghost had not cried
out , however , nor even so much as moved , for it was neither more nor
less than a tall tombstone shining white in the moonlight . 

 " Alack-a-day ! " cried the old woman ,  " that I should have a son with so
little wit as to beat a gravestone till his knuckles are sore ! Now if
he had covered it with something black that it might not alarm timid
women or children , that would at least have been an act of charity . " 

 " Live and learn , " said the cobbler . The following night he again set
forth , but this time in another direction . As he was crossing a field
behind his house he saw some long pieces of linen which his mother had
put out to bleach in the dew . 

 " More ghosts ! " cried the shoemaker ,  " and they know who is behind them . 
They have fallen flat at the sound of my footsteps . But one must
think of others as well as oneself , and it is not every heart that is
as stout as mine . " Saying which he returned to the house for something
black to throw over the prostrate ghosts . Now the kitchen chimney had
been swept that morning , and by the back door stood a sack of soot . 

 " What is blacker than soot ? " said the cobbler; and taking the sack , he
shook it out over the pieces of linen till not a thread of white was
to be seen . After which he went home , and boasted of his good deeds . 

The widow now saw that she must be more careful as to what she said;
so , after weighing the matter for some time , she suggested to the
cobbler that the next night he should watch for ghosts at home;  " for
they are to be seen , " said she ,  " as well when one is in bed as in the
fields . " 

 " There you are right , " said the cobbler ,  " for I have this day read of
a ghost that appeared to a man in his own house . The candles burnt
blue , and when he had called thrice upon the apparition , he became
senseless . " 

 " That was his mistake , " said the old woman .  " He should have turned a
deaf ear , and even pretended to slumber; but it is not every one who
has courage for this . If one could really fall asleep in the face of
the apparition , there would be true bravery . " 

 " Leave that to me , " said the cobbler . And the widow went off
chuckling , to herself ,  " If he comes to any mischance by holding his
tongue and going to sleep , ill-luck has got him by the leg , and
counsel is wasted on him . " 

As soon as his mother was in bed , the cobbler prepared for his watch . 
First he got together all the candles in the house , and stuck them
here and there about the kitchen , and sat down to watch till they
should burn blue . After waiting some time , during which the candles
only guttered with the draughts , the cobbler decided to go to rest for
a while .  " It is too early yet , " he thought;  " I shall see nothing till
midnight . " 

Very soon , however , he fell asleep; but towards morning he awoke , and
in the dim light perceived a figure in white at his bedside . It was a
blacksmith who lived near , and he had run in in his night-shirt
without so much as slippers on his feet . 

 " The ghost at last ! " thought the cobbler , and , remembering his
mother ' s advice , he turned over and shut his eyes . 

 " Neighbour ! neighbour ! " cried the blacksmith ,  " your house is on fire ! " 

 " An old bird is not to be caught with chaff , " chuckled the cobbler to
himself; and he pulled the bed-clothes over his head . 

 " Neighbour ! " roared the blacksmith , snatching at the quilt to drag it
off ,  " are you mad ? The house is burning over your head . Get up for
your life ! " 

 " I have the courage of a general , and more , " thought the cobbler; and
holding tightly on to the clothes he pretended to snore . 

 " If you will burn , bum ! " cried the blacksmith angrily ,  " but I mean to
save my bones " --with which he ran off . 

And burnt the cobbler undoubtedly would have been , had not his
mother ' s cries at last convinced him that the candles had set fire to
his house , which was wrapped in flames . With some difficulty he
escaped with his life , but of all he possessed nothing remained to him
but his tools and a few articles of furniture that the widow had
saved . 

As he was now again reduced to poverty , he was obliged to work as
diligently as in former years , and passed the rest of his days in the
same peace and prosperity which he had before enjoyed . 


