In the Highlands of Scotland there once lived a Laird of Brockburn , 
who would not believe in fairies . Although his sixth cousin on the
mother ' s side , as he returned one night from a wedding , had seen the
Men of Peace hunting on the sides of Ben Muich Dhui , dressed in green , 
and with silver-mounted bridles to their horses which jingled as they
rode; and though Rory the fiddler having gone to play at a christening
did never come home , but crossing a hill near Brockburn in a mist was
seduced into a _Shian_[1] or fairy turret , where , as all decent bodies
well believe , he is playing still--in spite , I say , of the wise saws
and experience of all his neighbours , Brockburn remained obstinately
incredulous . 

[ 1: _Shian_ , a Gaelic name for fairy towers , which by day are
not to be told from mountain crags . ]

Not that he bore any ill-will to the Good People , or spoke uncivilly
of them; indeed he always disavowed any feeling of disrespect towards
them if they existed , saying that he was a man of peace himself , and
anxious to live peaceably with whatever neighbours he had , but that
till he had seen one of the _Daoiné Shi_[2] he could not believe in
them . 

[ 2: _Daoiné Shi_  ( pronounced _Dheener Shee_ ) = Men of Peace . ]

Now one afternoon , between Hallowmas and Yule , it chanced that the
Laird , being out on the hills looking for some cattle , got parted from
his men and dogs and was overtaken by a mist , in which , familiar as
the country was to him , he lost his way . 

In vain he raised his voice high , and listened low , no sound of man or
beast came back to him through the thickening vapour . 

Then night fell , and darkness was added to the fog , so that Brockburn
needed to sound every step with his _rung_[3] before he took it . 

[ 3: _Rung_ = a thick stick . ]

Suddenly light footsteps pattered beside him , then Something rubbed
against him , then It ran between his legs . The delighted Laird made
sure that his favourite collie had found him once more . 

 " Wow , Jock , man ! " he cried;  " but ye needna throw me on my face . What ' s
got ye the night , that _you_ should lose your way in a bit mist ? " 

To this a voice from the level of his elbow replied , in piping but
patronizing tones;

 " Never did I lose my way in a mist since the night that Finn crossed
over to Ireland in the Dawn of History . Eh , Laird ! I ' m weel acquaint
with every bit path on the hill-side these hundreds of years , and I ' ll
guide ye safe hame , never fear ! " 

The hairs on Brockburn ' s head stood on end till they lifted his broad
bonnet , and a damp chill broke out over him that was not the fog . But , 
for all that , he stoutly resisted the evidence of his senses , and only
felt about him for the collie ' s head to pat , crying:

 " Bark ! Jock , my mannie , bark ! Then I ' ll recognize your voice , ye ken . 
It ' s no canny to hear ye speak like a Christian , my wee doggie . " 

 " I ' m nae your doggie , I ' m a Man of Peace , " was the reply .  " Dinna
miscall your betters , Brockburn: why will ye not credit our existence , 
man ? " 

 " Seein ' s believin ' , " said the Laird , stubbornly;  " but the mist ' s ower
thick for seein ' the night , ye ken . " 

 " Turn roun ' to your left , man , and ye ' ll see , " said the Dwarf , and
catching Brockburn by the arm , he twisted him swiftly round three
times , when a sudden blaze of light poured through the mist , and
revealed a crag of the mountain well known to the Laird , and which he
now saw to be a kind of turret , or tower . 

Lights shone gaily through the crevices or windows of the _Shian_ , 
and sounds of revelry came forth , among which fiddling was
conspicuous . The tune played at that moment was  " Delvyn-side . " 

Blinded by the light , and amazed at what he saw , the Laird staggered , 
and was silent . 

 " Keep to your feet , man--keep to your feet ! " said the Dwarf , laughing . 
 " I doubt ye ' re fou , Brockburn ! " 

 " I ' m nae fou , " said the Laird , slowly , his rung grasped firmly in his
hand , and his bonnet set back from his face , which was deadly pale . 
 " But--man-_is yon Rory ? _ I ' d know his fiddle in a thousand . " 

 " Ask no questions , and ye ' ll be tellt no lees , " said the Dwarf . Then
stepping up to the door of the _Shian_ , he stood so that the light
from within fell full upon him , and the astonished Laird saw a tiny
but well-proportioned man , with delicate features , and golden hair
flowing over his shoulders . He wore a cloak of green cloth , lined with
daisies , and had silver shoes . His beautiful face quivered with
amusement , and he cried triumphantly ,  " D ' ye see me ? --d ' ye see me noo , 
Brockburn ? " 

 " Aye , aye , " said the Laird;  " and seein ' s believin ' . " 

 " Then roun ' wi ' ye ! " shouted the Man of Peace; and once more seizing
the Laird by the arm , he turned him swiftly round--this time , to the
right--and at the third turn the light vanished , and Brockburn and
the Man of Peace were once more alone together in the mist . 

 " Aweel , Brockburn , " said the Man of Peace ,  " I ' ll alloo ye ' re candid , 
and have a convincible mind . I ' m no ill disposit to ye , and yese get
safe hame , man . " 

As he spoke he stooped down , and picking up half-a-dozen big stones
from the mountain-side , he gave them to the Laird , saying ,  " If the
gudewife asks ye about the bit stanes , say ye got them in a
compliment . " [4]

[ 4:  " In a compliment " =  " as a present . " ]

Brockburn put them into his pocket , briefly saying ,  " I ' m obleeged to
ye; " but as he followed the Man of Peace down the hill-side , he found
the obligation so heavy , that from time to time he threw a stone away , 
unobserved , as he hoped , by his companion . When the first stone fell , 
the Man of Peace looked sharply round , saying:

 " What ' s yon ? " 

 " It ' ll be me striking my rung upon the ground , " said the Laird . 

 " You ' re mad , " said the Man of Peace , and Brockburn felt sure that he
knew the truth , and was displeased . But as they went on , the stones
were so heavy , and bumped the Laird ' s side so hard , that he threw away
a second , dropping it as gently as he could . But the sound of its
fall did not escape the ears of the Man of Peace , who cried as before:

 " What ' s yon ? " 

 " It ' s jest a nasty hoast[5] that I have , " said the Laird . 

[ 5:  " Hoast " = cough . ]

 " Man , you ' re daft , " said the Dwarf , contemptuously;  " that ' s what ails
ye . " 

The Laird now resolved to be prudent , but the inconvenience of his
burden was so great that after a while he resolved to risk the
displeasure of the Man of Peace once more , and gently slipped a third
stone to the ground . 

 " Third time ' s lucky , " he thought . But the proverb failed him , for the
Dwarf turned as before , shouting:  " What ' s yon ? " 

 " It ' ll be my new brogues[6] that ye hear bumpin ' Upon the muckle
stanes , " said the Laird . 

[ 6:  " Brogues " = shoes . ]

 " Ye ' re fou , Brockburn , I tellt ye so . Ye ' re fou ! " growled the Man of
Peace , angrily , and the Laird dared not drop any more of the Dwarfs
gifts . After a while his companion ' s good-humour seemed to return , and
he became talkative and generous . 

 " I mind your great-grandfather weel , Brockburn . He was a hamely man , I
found his sheep for him one nicht on this verra hill-side . Mair by
token , ye ' ll find your beasties at hame , and the men and the dogs
forebye . " 

The Laird thanked him heartily , and after a while the Dwarf became
more liberal-spirited still . 

 " Yese no have to say that ye ' ve been with the _Daoiné Shi_ and are no
the better for it , " he said .  " I ' m thinking I ' ll grant ye three wushes . 
But choose wisely , man , and dinna throw _them_ away . I hae my fears
that ye ' re no without a bee in your bonnet , Brockburn . " 

Incensed by this insinuation , the Laird defended his own sagacity at
some length , and retorted on his companion with doubts of the power of
the _Daoiné Shi_ to grant wishes . 

 " The proof of the pudding ' s in the eating o ' t , " said the Man of Peace . 
 " Wush away , Brockburn , and mak the nut as hard to crack as ye will . " 

The Laird at once began to cast about in his mind for three wishes
sufficiently comprehensive to secure his lifelong prosperity; but the
more he beat his brains the less could he satisfy himself . 

How many miles he wandered thus , the Dwarf keeping silently beside
him , he never knew , before he sank exhausted on the ground , saying:

 " I ' m thinking , man , that if ye could bring hame to me , in place of
bringing me hame , I ' d misdoubt your powers nae mair . It ' s a far cry to
Loch Awe , [7] ye ken , and it ' s a weary long road to Brockburn . " 

[ 7:  " It ' s a far cry to Loch Awe . " --_Scotch Proverb_ . ]

 " Is this your wush ? " asked the Man of Peace . 

 " This is my wush , " said the Laird , striking his rung upon the ground . 

The words had scarcely passed his lips when the whole homestead of
Brockburn , house and farm buildings , was planted upon the bleak
hill-side . 

The astonished Laird now began to bewail the rash wish which had
removed his home from the sheltered and fertile valley where it
originally stood to the barren side of a bleak mountain . 

The Man of Peace , however , would not take any hints as to undoing his
work of his own accord . All he said was:

 " If ye wush it away , so it ' ll be . But then ye ' ll only have one wush
left . Ye ' ve small discretion the nicht , Brockburn , I ' m feared . " 

 " To leave the steading in sic a spot is no to be thought on , " sighed
the Laird , as he spent his second wish in undoing his first . But he
cannily added the provision:

 " And ye may tak me wi ' it . " 

The words were no sooner spoken than the homestead was back in its
place , and Brockburn himself was lying in his own bed , Jock , his
favourite collie , barking and licking his face by turns for joy . 

 " Whisht , whisht , Jock ! " said the Laird .  " Ye wouldna bark when I begged
of ye , so ye may hand your peace noo . " 

And pushing the collie from him , he sat up in bed and looked anxiously
but vainly round the chamber for the Man of Peace . 

 " Lie doun , lie doun , " cried the gudewife from beside him .  " Ye ' re
surely out o ' your wuts , Brockburn . Would ye gang stravaging about the
country again the nicht ? " 

 " Where is he ? " cried the Laird . 

 " There ' s not a soul here but your lawful wife and your ain dear
doggie . Was there ae body that ye expected ? " asked his wife . 

 " The Man o ' Peace , woman ! " cried Brockburn .  " I ' ve ane o ' my wushes to
get , and I maun hae ' t . " 

 " The man ' s mad ! " was the gudewife ' s comment .  " Ye ' ve surely forgotten
yoursel , Brockburn . Ye never believed in the _Daoiné Shi_ before . " 

 " Seein ' s believin ' , " said the Laird .  " I forgathered with a Man o ' 
Peace the nicht on the hill , and I wush I just saw him again . " 

As the Laird spoke the window of the chamber was lit up from without , 
and the Man of Peace appeared sitting on the window-ledge in his
daisy-lined cloak , his feet hanging down into the room , the silver
shoes glittering as they dangled . 

 " I ' m here , Brockburn ! " he cried .  " But eh , man ! ye ' ve had your last
wush . " 

And even as the stupefied Laird gazed , the light slowly died away , and
the Man of Peace vanished also . 

On the following morning the Laird was roused from sleep by loud cries
of surprise and admiration . 

The good wife had been stirring for some hours , and in emptying the
pockets of her good man ' s coat she had found three huge cairngorms of
exquisite tint and lustre . Brockburn thus discovered the value of the
gifts , half of which he had thrown away . 

But no subsequent visits to the hill-side led to their recovery . Many
a time did the Laird bring home a heavy pocketful of stones , at the
thrifty gudewife ' s bidding , but they only proved to be the common
stones of the mountain-side . The _Shian_ could never be distinguished
from any other crag , and the _Daoiné Shi_ were visible no more . 

Yet it is said that the Laird of Brockburn prospered and throve
thereafter , in acre , stall , and steading , as those seldom prosper who
have not the good word of the People of Peace . 


