In days gone by there lived a poor widow who had brought up her only
child so well that the little lass was more helpful and handy than
many a grown-up person . 

When other women's children were tearing and dirtying their clothes , 
clamouring at their mothers' skirts for this and that , losing and
breaking and spoiling things , and getting into mischief of all kinds , 
the widow's little girl , with her tiny thimble on her finger , could
patch quite neatly . She was to be trusted to put anything in its
proper place , and when meals were over she would stand on a little
stool at the table washing up the dishes . Moreover , she could darn
stockings so well that the darn looked like a part of the stocking . 
The slatternly mothers , who spoiled and scolded their children by
turns , and had never taught them to be tidy and obedient , used often
to quote the widow's little girl to their troublesome brats , and say , 
"Why don't you help your mother as the widow's daughter helps her ? "

Thus it came about that the helpless , useless , untidy little girls
hated the very name of the widow's daughter , because they were always
being told of her usefulness and neatness . 

Now the widow's child often earned a few pence by herding sheep or
pigs for the farmers , or by darning stockings for their wives , and as
she could be trusted , people were very glad to employ her . One day she
was keeping watch over five little pigs in a field , and , not to waste
time , was darning a pair of stockings as well , when some of the little
girls who had a spite against her resolved to play her a trick . 

Near the field where the little maid and the pigs were there was a
wood , into which all children were strictly forbidden to go . For in
the depths of the wood there lived a terrible Ogre and Ogress , who
kidnapped all children who strayed near their dwelling . Every morning
the Ogre threw a big black bag over his shoulder , and stalked through
the forest , making the ground shake as he walked . If he found any
truant children he popped them into his bag , and when he got home his
wife cooked them for supper . 

The trick played upon the widow's daughter was this . Five little girls
came up to the field where she was herding the five little pigs , and
each chasing a pig , they drove them into the Ogre's wood . In vain the
little maid called to her flock; the pigs ran in a frightened troop
into the wood , and she ran after them . When the five little girls saw
that she had got them together again , they ran in to chase them away
once more , and so they were all in the wood together , when the ground
shook under them , upsetting the six little girls and the five little
pigs; and as they rolled over the Ogre picked them up , and put them
one after another into his bag . 

When they were jolting about with the pigs in the poke as the Ogre
strode homewards , the five spiteful children were as sorry as you
please; and as the pigs were always fighting and struggling to get to
the top , they did not escape without some scratches . And their
screams , and the squealing of the little pigs made such a noise that
the Ogre's wife heard it a mile and a half away in the depths of the
wood; and she lighted a fire under the copper , and filled it with
water , ready to cook whatever her husband brought home . 

As for the widow's little daughter she pulled her needle-book from her
pocket , and every now and then she pushed a needle through the sack , 
that it might fall on the ground , and serve as a guide if she should
ever have the chance of finding her way home again . 

When the Ogre arrived , he emptied the sack , and sent the six little
girls and the five little pigs all sprawling on to the floor , saying:

"These will last us some time . Cook the fattest , and put the rest
into the cellar . And whilst you get dinner ready , I will take another
stroll with the bag . Luck seldom comes singly . "

When he had gone , the Ogress looked over the children , and picked out
the widow's daughter , saying:

"You look the most good-humoured . And the best-tempered always make
the best eating . "

So she set her down on a stool by the fire till the water should boil , 
and locked the others up in the cellar . 

"Tears won't put the fire out , " thought the little maid . So instead of
crying she pulled out the old stocking , and went on with her darning . 
When the Ogress came back from the cellar she went up to her and
looked at her work . 

"How you darn ! " she cried . "Now that's a sort of thing I hate . And the
Ogre does wear such big holes in his stockings , and his feet are so
large , that , though my hand is not a small one , I cannot fill out the
heel with my fist , and then who's to darn it neatly I should like to
know ? "

"If I had a basin big enough to fill out the heel , I think I could do
it , " said the little maid . 

The Ogress scratched her big ear thoughtfully for a minute , and then
she said:

"To lose a chance is to cheat oneself . Why shouldn't this one darn
while the others boil ? Yes , I think you shall try . Six days ought to
serve for mending all the stockings , though the Ogre hasn't a whole
pair left , and angry enough he'll be . And when household matters are
not to his mind he puts that big sack over my head , and ties it round
my neck . And if you had ever done housework with your head in a poke , 
you'd know what it is ! So you shall darn the stockings , and if you do
them well , I'll cook one of the others first instead of you . "

Saying which , the Ogress fetched one of the Ogre's stockings , and the
widow's child put a big basin into the heel to stretch it , and began
to darn . The Ogress watched her till she had put all the threads one
way , and when she began to run the cross threads , interlacing them
with the utmost exactness , the old creature was delighted , and went to
fetch another child to be cooked instead of the widow's . 

When the other little girl came up , she cried and screamed so that the
room rang with her lamentations , and the widow's child laid down her
needle and ceased working . 

"Why don't you go on darning ? " asked the Ogress . 

"Alas ! dear mother , " said she , "the little sister's cries make my
heart beat so that I cannot darn evenly . "

"Then she must go back to the cellar for a bit , " said the Ogress . 
"And meanwhile I'll sharpen the knife . "

So after she had taken back the crying child , and had watched the
little girl , who now darned away as skilfully as ever , the Ogress took
down a huge knife from the wall , and began to sharpen it on a
grindstone in a corner of the kitchen . As she sharpened the knife , she
glanced from time to time at the little maid , and soon perceived that
she had once more ceased working . 

"Why don't you go on darning ? " asked the Ogress . 

"Alas ! dear mother , " said the child , "when I hear you sharpening that
terrible knife my hands tremble so that I cannot thread my needle . "

"Well , it will do now , " growled the Ogress , feeling the edge of the
blade with her horny finger; and , having seen the darning-needle once
more at work , she went to fetch up one of the children . As she went , 
she hummed what cookmaids sing--

 "Dilly , dilly duckling , come and be killed ! "

But it sounded like the wheezing and groaning of a heavy old door upon
its rusty hinges . 

When she came in , with the child in one hand , and the huge knife in
the other , she went up to the little darner to look at her work . The
heel of the Ogre's stocking was exquisitely mended , all but seven
threads; but the little maid sat idle with her hands before her . 

"Why don't you go on darning ? " asked the Ogress . 

"Alas ! dear mother , " was the reply , "when I think of my little
playmate about to die , the tears blind my eyes , so that I cannot see
what stitches I take . Wherefore I beg of you , dear mother , to cook one
of the little pigs instead , that I may be able to go on with my work , 
and that a pair of stockings may be ready to-morrow morning when the
Ogre will ask for them; so my playmate's life will be spared , and your
head will not be put into a poke . "

At first the Ogress would not hear of such a thing , but at last she
consented , and made a stew of one of the little pigs instead of
cooking the little girl . 

"But supposing the Ogre goes to count the children , " said she; "he
will find one too many . "

"Then let her go , dear mother , " said the widow's daughter; "she will
find her way home , and you will never be blamed . "

"But she must stir the stew with her forefinger first , " said the
Ogress , "that it may have a human flavour . "

So the little girl had to stir the hot stew with her finger , which
scalded it badly; and then she was set at liberty , and ran home as
hard as she could; and as the little maid's needles sparkled here and
there on the path , she had no difficulty in finding her way . 

The Ogre was quite contented with his dinner , and the Ogress got great
praise for the way in which she had darned his stockings . Thus it went
on for four days more . As the widow's little girl wouldn't work if her
companions were killed , the Ogress cooked the pigs one after another , 
and the children were all sent away with burnt forefingers . 

When the fifth had been dismissed , and all the pigs were eaten , the
Ogress said:

"To-morrow you will have to be stewed , and now I wish I had kept one
of the others that I might have saved you altogether to work for me . 
However , there is one comfort , the stockings are finished . "

But meanwhile the other children had got safely home , and had told
their tale . And all the men of the place set off at once to attack the
Ogre , and release the widow's child . Guided by the needles , they
arrived just as the Ogress was sharpening the big knife for the last
time . 

So they killed the Ogre and his wife , and took the industrious little
maid back to her mother . 

The other little girls were now very repentant; and when their
fingers were well , they all learned to darn stockings at once . 

And as there was now no danger about going into the wood , it was no
longer forbidden . And this being the case , the children were much less
anxious to play there than formerly . 


