There was once a young fellow whom fortune had blessed with a good
mother , a clever head , and a strong body . But beyond this she had not
much favoured him; and though able and willing to work , he had often
little to do , and less to eat . But his mother had taught him to be
contented with his own lot , and to feel for others . Moreover , from her
he inherited a great love for flowers . 

One day , when his pockets were emptiest , a fair was held in the
neighbouring town , and he must needs go as well as the rest , though he
had no money to spend . But he stuck a buttercup in his cap , for which
he had nothing to pay , and strode along as merrily as the most . 

Towards evening some of the merrymakers became riotous; and a party of
them fell upon an old Jew who was keeping a stall of glass and china , 
and would smash his stock . Now as the Jew stood before his booth
beseeching them to spare his property , up came the strong young man , 
with the flower still unwithered in his cap , and he took the old Jew's
part and defended him . For from childhood his mother had taught him to
feel for others . 

So those who would have ill-treated the old Jew now moved off , and the
young man stayed with him till he had packed up his wares . 

Then the Jew turned towards him and said , "My son , he who delivers the
oppressed , and has respect unto the aged , has need of no reward , for
the blessing of Him that blesseth is about him . Nevertheless , that I
may not seem ungrateful , choose , I pray thee , one of these china jars;
and take it to thee for thine own . If thou shalt choose well , it may
be of more use to thee than presently appears . "

Thereupon the young man examined the jars , which were highly
ornamented with many figures and devices; but he chose one that was
comparatively plain; only it had a bunch of flowers painted on the
front , round which was a pretty device in spots or circles of gold . 

Then said the Jew , "My son , why have you chosen this jar , when there
are others so much finer ? "

The young man said , "Because the flowers please me , and I have a love
for flowers . "

Then said the Jew , "Happy is he whose tastes are simple ! Moreover , 
herein is a rare wisdom , and thou hast gained that which is the most
valuable of my possessions . This jar has properties which I will
further explain to thee . It was given to me by a wise woman , subject
to this condition , that I must expose it for sale from sunrise to
sunset at the yearly fair . When I understood this I took counsel with
myself how I should preserve it; and I bought other china jars of more
apparent value , and I marked them all with the same price . For I said
within myself , 'There is no man who does not desire to get as much as
he can for his money , therefore , from its contrast with these others , 
my jar is safe . ' And it was even so; for truly , many have desired to
buy the jar because of the delicate beauty of the flowers , if I would
have sold it for less than others which seemed more valuable . "

"Many times it has been almost gone , but when I have shown the others
at the same price , my customers have reviled me , saying , 'Dog of a
Jew , dost thou ask as much for this as for these others Which are
manifestly worth double ? ' and they have either departed , cursing me , 
and taking nothing; or they have bought one of the more richly
decorated jars at the same price . For verily in most men the spirit of
covetousness is stronger than the love of beauty , and they rather
desire to get much for their money , than to obtain that which is
suitable and convenient . "

"But in thee , O young man ! I have beheld a rare wisdom . To choose that
which is good in thine eyes , and suitable to thy needs , rather than
that which satisfieth the lust of over-reaching; and lo ! what I have
so long kept from thousands , has become thine ! "

Then the young man wished to restore to the Jew the jar he valued so
highly , and to choose another . 

But the Jew refused , saying , "A gift cannot be recalled . Moreover , I
will now explain to thee its uses . Within the jar lies a toad , whose
spit is poison . But it will never spit at its master . Every evening
thou must feed it with bread and milk , when it will fall asleep; and
at sunrise in the morning it will awake and breathe heavily against
the side of the jar , which will thus become warm . As it warms the
flowers will blossom out , and become real , and full of perfume , and
thou wilt be able to pluck them without diminishing their number . 
Moreover , these twelve round spots of gold will drop off , and become
twelve gold pieces , which will be thine . And thus it will be every
day . Only thou must thyself rise with the sun , and gather the flowers
and the gold with thine own hands . Furthermore , when the jar cools , 
the flowers and gilding will be as before . Fare thee well . "

And even as he spoke the Jew lifted the huge crate of china on to his
back , and disappeared among the crowd . 

All came about as the Jew had promised . As he had twelve gold pieces a
day , the young man now wanted for nothing , besides which he had fresh
flowers on his table all the year round . 

Now it is well said , "Thy business is my business , and the business of
all beside;" for every man's affairs are his neighbours' property . 
Thus it came about that all those who lived near the young man were
perplexed that he had such beautiful flowers in all seasons; and
esteemed it as an injury to themselves that he should have them and
give no explanation as to whence they came . 

At last it came to the ears of the king , and he also was disturbed . 
For he was curious , and fond of prying into small matters; a taste
which ill becomes those of high position . But the king had no child to
succeed him; and he was always suspecting those about him of plotting
to obtain the crown , and thus he came to be for ever prying into the
affairs of his subjects . 

Now when he heard of the young man who had flowers on his table all
the year round , he desired one of his officers to go and question him
as to how he obtained them . But the young man contrived to evade his
questions , and the matter was at rest for a while . 

Then the king sent another messenger , with orders to press the young
man more closely; and because the young man disdained to tell a lie , 
he said , "I get the flowers from yon china jar . "

Then the messenger returned , and said to the king , "The young man says
that he gets the flowers from a certain china jar which stands in his
room . "

Then said the king , "Bring the contents of the jar hither to me . " And
the messenger returned and brought the toad . 

But when the king laid hold upon the toad , it spat in his face; and he
was poisoned and died . 

Then the toad sat upon the king's mouth , and would not be enticed
away . And every one feared to touch it because it spat poison . And
they called the wise men of the council; and they performed certain
rites to charm away the toad , and yet it would not go . 

But after three days , the master of the toad came to the palace , and
without saying who he was , he desired to be permitted to try and get
the toad from the corpse of the king . 

And when he was taken into the king's chamber , he stood and beckoned
to the toad , saying , "The person of the king and the bodies of the
dead are sacred , wherefore come away . "

And the toad crawled from the king's face and came to him , and did not
spit at him; and he put it back into the jar . 

Then said the wise men , "There is no one so fit to succeed to the
kingdom as this man is; both for wisdom of speech and for the power of
command . "

And what they said pleased the people; and the young man was made
king . And in due time he married an amiable and talented princess , and
had children . And he ruled the kingdom well and wisely , and was
beloved till his death . 

Now when , after the lapse of many years , he died , there was great
grief among the people , and his body was laid out in his own room , and
the people were permitted to come and look upon his face for the last
time . 

And among the crowd there appeared an aged Jew . And he did not weep as
did the others; but he came and stood by the bier , and gazed upon the
face of the dead king in silence . And after a while he exclaimed , and
said:

"Oh , wonderful spectacle ! A man , and not covetous . A ruler , and not
oppressive . Contented in poverty , and moderate in wealth . Elect of the
people , and beloved to the end ! "

And when he had said this , he again became silent , and stood as one
astonished . 

And no one knew when he came in , nor perceived when he departed . 

But when they came to search for the china jar , it was gone , and could
never afterwards be found . 


