There was once a wicked magician who prospered , and did much evil for
many years . But there came a day when Vengeance , disguised as a blind
beggar , overtook him , and outwitted him , and stole his magic wand . 
With this he had been accustomed to turn those who offended him into
any shape he pleased; and now that he had lost it he could only
transform himself . 

As Vengeance was returning to his place , he passed through a village , 
the inhabitants of which had formerly lived in great terror of the
magician , and told them of the downfall of his power . But they only
said ,  " Blind beggars have long tongues . One must not believe all one
hears , " and shrugged their shoulders , and left him . 

Then Vengeance waved the wand and said ,  " As you have doubted me , 
distress each other; " and so departed . 

By and by he came to another village , and told the news . But here the
villagers were full of delight , and made a feast , and put the blind
beggar in the place of honour; who , when he departed , said ,  " As you
have done by me , deal with each other always ! " and went on to the next
village . 

In this place he was received with even warmer welcome; and when the
feast was over , the people brought him to the bridge which led out of
the village , and gave him a guide-dog to help him on his way . 

Then the blind beggar waved the wand once more and said;

 " Those who are so good to strangers must needs be good to each other . 
But that nothing may be wanting to the peace of this place , I grant to
the beasts and birds in it that they may understand the language of
men . " 

Then he broke the wand in pieces , and threw it into the stream . And
when the people turned their heads back again from watching the bits
as they floated away , the blind beggar was gone . 

Meanwhile the magician was wild with rage at the loss of his wand , for
all his pleasure was to do harm and hurt . But when he came to himself
he said:  " One can do a good deal of harm with his tongue . I will turn
mischief-maker; and when the place is too hot to hold me , I can escape
in what form I please . " 

Then he came to the first village , where Vengeance had gone before , 
and here he lived for a year and a day in various disguises; and he
made more misery with his tongue than he had ever accomplished in any
other year with his magic wand . For every one distrusted his
neighbour , and was ready to believe ill of him . So parents disowned
their children , and husband and wives parted , and lovers broke faith;
and servants and masters disagreed; and old friends became bitter
enemies , till at last the place was intolerable even to the magician , 
and he changed himself into a cockchafer , and flew to the next
village , where , Vengeance had gone before . 

Here also he dwelt for a year and a day , and then he left it because
he could do no harm . For those who loved each other trusted each
other , and the magician made mischief in vain . In one of his disguises
he was detected , and only escaped with his life from the enraged
villagers by changing himself into a cockchafer and flying on to the
next place , where Vengeance had gone before . 

In this village he made less mischief than in the first , and more than
in the second . And he exercised all his art , and changed his disguises
constantly; but the dogs knew him under all . 

One dog--the oldest dog in the place--was keeping watch over the
miller ' s house , when he saw the magician approaching , in the disguise
of an old woman . 

 " Do you see that old witch ? " said he to the sparrows , who were picking
up stray bits of grain in the yard .  " With her evil tongue she is
parting my master ' s daughter and the finest young fellow in the
country-side . She puts lies and truth together , with more skill than
you patch moss and feathers to build nests . And when she is asked
where she heard this or that , she says ,  ' A little bird told me so . ' " 

 " We never told her , " said the sparrows indignantly ,  " and if we had
your strength , Master Keeper , she should not malign us long ! " 

 " I believe you are right ! " said Master Keeper .  " Of what avail is it
that we have learned the language of men , if we do not help them to
the utmost of our powers ? She shall torment my young mistress no
more . " 

Saying which he flew upon the disguised magician as he entered the
gate , and would have torn him limb from limb , but that the
mischief-maker changed himself as before into a cockchafer , and flew
hastily from the village . 

And thus he might doubtless have escaped to do yet further harm , had
not three cock-sparrows overtaken him just before he crossed the
bridge . 

From three sides they hemmed him in , crying ,  " Which of us told you ? " 
 " Which of us told you ? "  " Which of us told you ? " --and pecked him to
pieces before he could transform himself again . 

After which peace and prosperity befell all the neighbourhood . 


