A Fool and a Knave once set up house together; which shows what a fool
the Fool was . 

The Knave was delighted with the agreement; and the Fool thought
himself most fortunate to have met with a companion who would supply
his lack of mother-wit . 

As neither of them liked work , the Knave proposed that they should
live upon their joint savings as long as these should last; and , to
avoid disputes , that they should use the Fool's share till it came to
an end , and then begin upon the Knave's stocking . 

So , for a short time , they lived in great comfort at the Fool's
expense , and were very good company; for easy times make easy tempers . 

Just when the store was exhausted , the Knave came running to the Fool
with an empty bag and a wry face , crying , "Dear friend , what shall we
do ? This bag , which I had safely buried under a gooseberry-bush , has
been taken up by some thief , and all my money stolen . My savings were
twice as large as yours; but now that they are gone , and I can no
longer perform my share of the bargain , I fear our partnership must be
dissolved . "

"Not so , dear friend , " said the Fool , who was very good-natured; "we
have shared good luck together , and now we will share poverty . But as
nothing is left , I fear we must seek work . "

"You speak very wisely , " said the Knave , "And what , for instance , can
you do ? "

"Very little , " said the Fool; "but that little I do well . "

"So do I , " said the Knave . "Now can you plough , or sow , or feed
cattle , or plant crops ? "

"Farming is not my business , " said the Fool . 

"Nor mine , " said the Knave; "but no doubt you are a handicraftsman . 
Are you clever at carpentry , mason's work , tailoring , or shoemaking ? "

"I do not doubt that I should have been had I learned the trades , "
said the Fool , "but I never was bound apprentice . "

"It is the same with myself , " said the Knave; "but you may have finer
talents . Can you paint , or play the fiddle ? "

"I never tried , " said the Fool; "so I don't know . "

"Just my case , " said the Knave . "And now , since we can't find work , I
propose that we travel till work finds us . "

The two comrades accordingly set forth , and they went on and on , till
they came to the foot of a hill , where a merchantman was standing by
his wagon , which had broken down . 

"You seem two strong men , " said he , as they advanced; "if you will
carry this chest of valuables up to the top of the hill , and down to
the bottom on the other side , where there is an inn , I will give you
two gold pieces for your trouble . "

The Knave and the Fool consented to this , saying , "Work has found us
at last;" and they lifted the box on to their shoulders . 

"Turn , and turn about , " said the Knave; "but the best turn between
friends is a good turn; so I will lead the way up-hill , which is the
hardest kind of travelling , and you shall go first down-hill , the easy
half of our journey . "

The Fool thought this proposal a very generous one , and , not knowing
that the lower end of their burden was the heavy one , he carried it
all the way . When they got to the inn , the merchant gave each of them
a gold piece , and , as the accommodation was good , they remained where
they were till their money was spent . After this , they lived there
awhile on credit; and when that was exhausted , they rose one morning
whilst the landlord was still in bed , and pursued their journey , 
leaving old scores behind them . 

They had been a long time without work or food , when they came upon a
man who sat by the roadside breaking stones , with a quart of porridge
and a spoon in a tin pot beside him . 

"You look hungry , friends , " said he , "and I , for my part , want to get
away . If you will break up this heap , you shall have the porridge for
supper . But when you have eaten it , put the pot and spoon under the
hedge , that I may find them when I return . "

"If we eat first , we shall have strength for our work , " said the
Knave; "and as there is only one spoon , we must eat by turns . But
fairly divide , friendly abide . As you went first the latter part of
our journey , I will begin on this occasion . When I stop , you fall to , 
and eat as many spoonfuls as I ate . Then I will follow you in like
fashion , and so on till the pot is empty . "

"Nothing could be fairer , " said the Fool; and the Knave began to eat , 
and went on till he had eaten a third of the porridge . The Fool , who
had counted every spoonful , now took his turn , and ate precisely as
much as his comrade . The Knave then began again , and was exact to a
mouthful; but it emptied the pot . Thus the Knave had twice as much as
the Fool , who could not see where he had been cheated . 

They then set to work . 

"As there is only one hammer , " said the Knave , "we must work , as we
supped , by turns; and as I began last time , you shall begin this . 
After you have worked awhile , I will take the hammer from you , and do
as much myself whilst you rest . Then you shall take it up again , and
so on till the heap is finished . "

"It is not every one who is as just as you , " said the Fool; and taking
up the hammer , he set to work with a will . 

The Knave took care to let him go on till he had broken a third of the
stones , and then he did as good a share himself; after which the Fool
began again , and finished the heap . 

By this means the Fool did twice as much work as the Knave , and yet he
could not complain . 

As they moved on again , the Fool perceived that the Knave was taking
the can and the spoon with him . 

"I am sorry to see you do that , friend , " said he . 

"It's a very small theft , " said the Knave . "The can cannot have cost
more than sixpence when new . "

"That was not what I meant , " said the Fool , "so much as that I fear
the owner will find it out . "

"He will only think the things have been stolen by some vagrant , "
said the Knave--"which , indeed , they would be if we left them . But as
you seem to have a tender conscience , I will keep them myself . "

After a while they met with a farmer , who offered to give them supper
and a night's lodging , if they would scare the birds from a field of
corn for him till sunset . 

"I will go into the outlying fields , " said the Knave , "and as I see
the birds coming , I will turn them back . You , dear friend , remain in
the corn , and scare away the few that may escape me . "

But whilst the Fool clapped and shouted till he was tired , the Knave
went to the other side of the hedge , and lay down for a nap . 

As they sat together at supper , the Fool said , "Dear friend , this is
laborious work . I propose that we ask the farmer to let us tend sheep , 
instead . That is a very different affair . One lies on the hillside all
day . The birds do not steal sheep; and all this shouting and clapping
is saved . "

The Knave very willingly agreed , and next morning the two friends
drove a flock of sheep on to the downs . The sheep at once began to
nibble , the dog sat with his tongue out , panting , and the Knave and
Fool lay down on their backs , and covered their faces with their hats
to shield them from the sun . 

Thus they lay till evening , when , the sun being down , they uncovered
their faces , and found that the sheep had all strayed away , and the
dog after them . 

"The only plan for us is to go separate ways in search of the flock , "
said the Knave; "only let us agree to meet here again . " They
accordingly started in opposite directions; but when the Fool was
fairly off , the Knave returned to his place , and lay down as before . 

By and by the dog brought the sheep back; so that , when the Fool
returned , the Knave got the credit of having found them; for the dog
scorned to explain his part in the matter . 

As they sat together at supper , the Fool said , "The work is not so
easy as I thought . Could we not find a better trade yet ? "

"Can you beg ? " said the Knave . "A beggar's trade is both easy and
profitable . Nothing is required but walking and talking . Then one
walks at his own pace , for there is no hurry , and no master , and the
same tale does for every door . And , that all may be fair and equal , 
you shall beg at the front door , whilst I ask an alms at the back . "

To this the Fool gladly agreed; and as he was as lean as a hunted cat , 
charitable people gave him a penny or two from time to time . 
Meanwhile , the Knave went round to the back yard , where he picked up
a fowl , or turkey , or anything that he could lay his hands upon . 

When he returned to the Fool , he would say , "See what has been given
to me , whilst you have only got a few pence . "

At last this made the Fool discontented , and he said , "I should like
now to exchange with you . I will go to the back doors , and you to the
front . "

The Knave consented , and at the next house the Fool went to the back
door; but the mistress of the farm only rated him , and sent him away . 
Meanwhile , the Knave , from the front , had watched her leave the
parlour , and slipping in through the window , he took a ham and a
couple of new loaves from the table , and so made off . 

When the friends met , the Fool was crestfallen at his ill luck , and
the Knave complained that all the burden of their support fell upon
him . "See , " said he , "what they give me , where you get only a mouthful
of abuse ! " And he dined heartily on what he had stolen; but the Fool
only had bits of the breadcrust , and the parings of the ham . 

At the next place the Fool went to the front door as before , and the
Knave secured a fat goose and some plums in the back yard , which he
popped under his cloak . The Fool came away with empty hands , and the
Knave scolded him , saying , "Do you suppose that I mean to share this
fat goose with a lazy beggar like you ? Go on , and find for yourself . "
With which he sat down and began to eat the plums , whilst the Fool
walked on alone . 

After a while , however , the Knave saw a stir in the direction of the
farm they had left , and he quickly perceived that the loss of the
goose was known , and that the farmer and his men were in pursuit of
the thief . So , hastily picking up the goose , he overtook the Fool , and
pressed it into his arms , saying , "Dear friend , pardon a passing ill
humour , of which I sincerely repent . Are we not partners in good luck
and ill ? I was wrong , dear friend; and , in token of my penitence , the
goose shall be yours alone . And here are a few plums with which you
may refresh yourself by the wayside . As for me , I will hasten on to
the next farm , and see if I can beg a bottle of wine to wash down the
dinner , and drink to our good-fellowship . " And before the Fool could
thank him , the Knave was off like the wind . 

By and by the farmer and his men came up , and found the Fool eating
the plums , with the goose on the grass beside him . 

They hurried him off to the justice , where his own story met with no
credit . The woman of the next farm came up also , and recognized him
for the man who had begged at her door the day she lost a ham and two
new loaves . In vain he said that these things also had been given to
his friend . The friend never appeared; and the poor Fool was whipped
and put in the stocks . 

Towards evening the Knave hurried up to the village green , where his
friend sat doing penance for the theft . 

"My dear friend , " said he , "what do I see ? Is such cruelty possible ? 
But I hear that the justice is not above a bribe , and we must at any
cost obtain your release . I am going at once to pawn my own boots and
cloak , and everything about me that I can spare , and if you have
anything to add , this is no time to hesitate . "

The poor Fool begged his friend to draw off his boots , and to take his
hat and coat as well , and to make all speed on his charitable errand . 

The Knave , took all that he could get , and , leaving his friend sitting
in the stocks in his shirt-sleeves , he disappeared as swiftly as one
could wish a man to carry a reprieve . 

For those good folks to whom everything must be explained in full , it
may be added that the Knave did not come back , and that he kept the
clothes . 

It was very hard on the Fool; but what can one expect if he keeps
company with a Knave ? 


