Once upon a time there was a little lamb frisking gaily about the
pasture . The bright sunshine and the soft breezes made him very happy . 
He had just finished a hearty meal and that made him happy too . He was
the very happiest little lamb in all the world and he thought that he
was the most wonderful little lamb . 

A big toad sat on the ground and watched him . After a while the toad
said:  " O , little lamb , how are you feeling today ? " 

The lamb replied that he had never felt better in all his life . 

 " Even though you are feeling very strong I can pull you into the sea , " 
said the toad . 

The little lamb laughed and laughed until he rolled over on the
ground . 

 " Just take hold of this rope and I ' ll show you how easy it is to pull
you into the sea , " said the toad . 

The lamb took hold of the rope . Then the toad said ,  " Please wait a
minute while I get a good long distance away from you . I can pull
better when I ' m not too near you . " 

The lamb waited and the toad hopped down to the sea . He hopped up into
a tree which hung over the water ' s edge and from there he hopped on to
the whale ' s back . He fastened the end of the rope around the whale
and then he called out to the lamb:  " All ready . Now we ' ll see how hard
you can pull . " 

When the whale felt the lamb pulling at the rope he swam away from the
shore . No matter how hard the lamb pulled or how much force he exerted
it did not do one bit of good . He was dragged down to the water ' s edge
as easily as could be . 

 " I give up , " said the lamb as he reached the water ' s edge . 

After that , although the sunshine was just as bright as ever , any one
who watched that little lamb could see that he was a little more meek . 

One day not long afterwards the sunshine was again very bright and the
little lamb was again feeling frisky . He was so happy and gay that he
had forgotten all about how the toad had pulled him down to the water
until the toad spoke to him . Then he remembered . 

 " O , little lamb , how are you feeling today ? " asked the toad . The
little lamb replied that he was very well . 

 " Let us run a race , " said the toad ,  " I think I can beat you . " 

 " You may be strong enough to pull me into the sea , " said the lamb , 
 " but surely I can run faster than you . I ' ve watched you hopping about
my pasture . You can ' t run fast at all . However , I ' ll gladly run a race
with you to prove what I say . " 

The toad set a goal and told the lamb to call out every little while
during the race so he could see how much farther ahead the lamb was . 
Then the toad and the lamb started . 

The toad had assembled all his brothers and his sisters and his
cousins and his uncles and his aunts before the race and had stationed
them at various points along the path of the race . He had told them
that whenever any of them should hear the lamb calling out ,  " Laculay , 
laculay , laculay , " the toad which was nearest should answer , 
 " Gulugubango , bango lay . " 

The lamb ran and ran as fast as he could . Then he remembered his
promise and called out ,  " Laculay , laculay , laculay . " He expected to
hear the toad answer from a long , long distance behind him . He was
much surprised to hear some one near him answer ,  " Gulugubango , bango
lay . " After that he ran faster than ever . 

After running on for some distance farther the lamb again called out , 
 " Laculay , laculay , laculay . " Again he heard the answer at only a short
distance away ,  " Gulugubango , bango lay . " He ran and ran until his
little heart was beating so fast that it seemed as if it would burst . 
At last he arrived at the goal of the race which the toad had set and
there sat the toad ' s brother who looked so much like him that the lamb
couldn ' t tell them apart . The lamb went back to his pasture very
meekly and quietly . He acknowledged that he had been beaten in the
race . 

The next morning the toad said to him ,  " Even though you did not run
fast enough to win the race , still you are a very fast runner . I have
told the daughter of the king about you and I have said to her that
some day she shall see me riding on your back with a bridle in your
mouth as if you were my horse . " 

The lamb was very angry .  " Perhaps you are strong enough to pull me
into the sea , and perhaps you can beat me when we run a race , " said
the lamb ,  " but never , never in the world will I be your horse . " 

Time passed and the sunshine was very bright and the soft , gentle
breezes were very sweet . The lamb was so happy again that he forgot
all about how the toad had pulled him into the sea , and how the toad
had beaten him at running the race . He was very sorry for the toad
when he saw him all humped up in a disconsolate little heap one day . 
 " O , poor toad , are you sick ? " he asked .  " Isn ' t there something I can
do to help you ? " 

The toad told him how very sick he was .  " There is something you could
do to help me , " he said ,  " but I don ' t believe that you are quite
strong enough or can travel quite fast enough . " 

The lamb took a deep breath and blew out his chest .  " I ' ll show you , " 
he said .  " Just tell me what it is . " 

The toad replied that he had promised to be at a party that afternoon
at the house of the king ' s daughter and he did not see how he could
possibly get there unless some one would carry him . 

 " Jump on my back , " said the lamb .  " I ' ll carry you . " 

The toad shook about on the lamb ' s back after they had started so that
it seemed as if he would surely fall off . After a little he said ,  " I
can not possibly stand riding like this . It jars all my sore spots . 
I ' ll have to get off . " He tried it a little while longer and shook
about worse than ever . Then he said ,  " Do you know , I think I could
endure this painful ride a little better if only I had something to
hold myself by ? Do you mind if I take a piece of grass and put it in
your mouth ? I can hold on to that when I shake about and my sore spots
will not hurt so much . " 

The lamb let the toad put a piece of grass in his mouth . 

After a while the toad asked for a little stick .  " The flies and
mosquitoes annoy me terribly , " he said .  " If only I had a little stick
I could wave it about over my head and frighten them away . It is very
bad for any one in my weak , nervous condition to be bothered by flies
and mosquitoes . " The lamb let the toad have a little stick to wave
over his head . 

At last the lamb and the toad drew near to the palace of the king . The
king ' s daughter was leaning out of the window watching for them . The
toad dug his feet into the lamb ' s sides , pulled hard on the piece of
the grass in the lamb ' s mouth and waved the little stick about over
the lamb ' s head .  " Go on , horse , " he said and the king ' s daughter heard
him . She laughed and laughed , and when all the rest of the people in
the palace saw the toad arriving mounted on the lamb ' s back and
driving him like a horse they laughed too . The lamb went meekly home
to his pasture and from that day to this when one wishes to speak of
meekness one says  " as meek as a lamb . " 




VI

Why the Tiger and the Stag

Fear Each Other


Once upon a time there was a large handsome stag with great branching
horns . One day he said to himself ,  " I am tired of having no home of my
own , and of just living anywhere . I shall build me a house . " He
searched on every hill , in every valley , by every stream , and under
all the trees for a suitable place . At last he found one that was just
right . It was not too high , nor too low , not too near a stream and not
too far away from one , not under too thick trees and not away from the
trees out under the hot sun .  " I am going to build my house here , " he
said , and he began to clear a place for it at once . He worked all day
and did not go away until night . 

Now in that same country there lived a large handsome tiger , with
sharp , sharp teeth and bright , cruel eyes . One day the tiger said to
himself ,  " I am tired of having no home of my own , --of just living
around anywhere ! I shall build me a house . " Accordingly the tiger
searched for a place to build his house . He searched on every hill , in
every valley , by every stream , and under all the trees . At last he
found a place which was just right . It was not too high nor too low , 
not too near a stream and not too far away from one , not under too
thick trees and yet not away from the trees out in the hot sun . The
tiger said to himself ,  " I am going to build my house here . The place
is all ready for me for there isn ' t very much underbrush here . " He
began at once and finished clearing the place . Then it became daylight
and he went away . 

At daylight the stag came back to do more work on his new house . 
 " H ' m , " he said when he looked at the clearing .  " Somebody is helping
me . The place is cleared and ready for me to build the foundation . " 

He began to work at once and worked all day . At night when the
foundation was laid , he went away . 

At night the tiger came to work at his new house .  " H ' m , " he said when
he looked at it .  " Somebody is helping me . The foundations of my house
are all laid . " He began to work at once and built the sides of the
house . He worked all night and went away at daybreak , leaving the
house with the sides completed . There was a big door and a funny
little window in the side . 

At daybreak the stag came back to work on his house . When he saw it he
rubbed his eyes for he thought that he must be dreaming . The sides of
the house were completed with a big door and a funny little window . 
 " Somebody must surely be helping me , " he said to himself as he began
to work to put on the roof . He worked hard all day and when the sun
went down , there was a roof of dried grass on the house .  " I can sleep
in my own house to-night , " he said . He made his bed in the corner and
soon was sound asleep . 

At night the tiger came back to work on his new house . When he saw it
he rubbed his eyes for he thought that he must be dreaming . There was
a roof of dried grass on the house . 

 " Somebody must surely be helping me , " he said to himself as he entered
the door . The first thing he saw when he entered the door was the stag
sound asleep in his bed in the corner .  " Who are you and what are you
doing in my house ? " he said in his deepest voice . 

The stag woke up with a start .  " Who are you and what are you doing in
my house ? " said the stag in his deepest voice . 

 " It is not your house . It is mine . I built it myself , " said the
tiger . 

 " It is my house , " said the stag .  " I built it myself . " 

 " I made the clearing for the house , " said the tiger ,  " I built the
sides and made the door and window . " 

 " I started the clearing , " said the stag .  " I laid the foundations and
put on the roof of dried grass . " 

The stag and the tiger quarrelled all night about whose house it was . 
At daybreak they decided that they would live together there . 

The next night the tiger said to the stag ,  " I ' m going hunting . Get the
water and have the wood ready for the fire . I shall be almost famished
when I return . " 

The stag got the wood and water ready . After a while the tiger came
back . He brought home for dinner a great handsome stag . The stag had
no appetite at all and he didn ' t sleep a wink that night . 

The next day the stag said that he was going hunting . He told the
tiger to have the wood and water ready when he got back . The tiger got
the wood and water ready . By and by the stag came back bringing with
him the body of a great tiger . 

 " I am nearly famished , " said the stag .  " Let ' s have dinner right away . " 
The tiger hadn ' t any appetite at all and he could not eat a mouthful . 

That night neither the tiger nor the stag could sleep a wink . The
tiger was afraid the stag would kill him if he shut his eyes for a
minute , and the stag was afraid the tiger would kill him if he slept
or even pretended to be asleep . Accordingly he kept wide awake too . 

Toward morning the stag got very cramped from keeping in one position
so long . He moved his head slightly . In doing this his horns struck
against the roof of the house . It made a terrible noise . The tiger
thought that the stag was about to spring upon him and kill him . He
made a leap for the door and ran out of it as fast as he could . He ran
and ran until he was far , far away from the house with the roof of
dried grass . 

The stag thought that the tiger was about to spring upon him and kill
him . He , too , made a leap for the door and ran and ran until he was
far , far away from the house with the roof of dried grass . The tiger
and the stag are still running away from each other until this very
day . 

The house with the roof of dried grass waited and waited there in the
place which was neither too high nor too low , too near the river nor
too far away , not under too thick trees nor out in the hot sun . It
waited and waited until it go so tired it fell down in a heap . 




VII

How the Speckled Hen Got

Her Speckles


Once upon a time , ages and ages ago , there was a little white hen . One
day she was busily engaged in scratching the soil to find worms and
insects for her breakfast . As she worked she sang over and over again
her little crooning song ,  " Quirrichi , quirrichi , quirrichi . " Suddenly
she noticed a tiny piece of paper lying on the ground .  " Quirrichi , 
quirrichi , what luck ! " she said to herself .  " This must be a letter . 
One time when the king , the great ruler of our country , held his court
in the meadow close by , many people brought him letters and laid them
at his feet . Now I , too , even I , the little white hen , have a letter . 
I am going to carry my letter to the king . " 

The next morning the little white hen started bravely out on her long
journey . She carried the letter very carefully in her little brown
basket . It was a long distance to the royal palace where the king
lived . The little white hen had never been so far from home in all her
life . 

After a while she met a friendly fox . Foxes and little white hens are
not usually very good friends , you know , but this fox was a friend of
the little white hen . Once upon a time she had helped the fox to
escape from a trap and the fox had never forgotten her kindness to
him . 

 " O , little white hen , where are you going ? " asked the fox . 

 " Quirrichi , quirrichi , " replied the little white hen ,  " I am going to
the royal palace to carry a letter to the king . " 

 " Indeed , little white hen , " said the fox ,  " I should like to go with
you . Give me your permission to accompany you on your journey . " 

 " I shall be glad to have you go with me , " said the little white hen . 
 " It is a very long journey to the royal palace where the king lives . 
Wouldn ' t you like me to carry you in my little brown basket ? " 

The fox climbed into the little brown basket . After the little white
hen had gone on for some distance farther she met a river . Once upon a
time the little white hen had done the river a kindness . He had , with
great difficulty , thrown some ugly worms upon the bank and he was
afraid they would crawl back in again . The little white hen had eaten
them for him . Always after that the river had been her friend . 

 " O , little white hen , where are you going ? " the river called out as
soon as he saw her . 

 " Quirrichi , quirrichi , I am going to the royal palace to carry a
letter to the king , " replied the little white hen . 

 " O , little white hen , may I go with you ? " asked the river . 

The little white hen told the river that he might go with her and
asked him to ride in the little brown basket . So the river climbed
into the little brown basket . 

After the little white hen had journeyed along for a time she came to
a fire . Once upon a time , when the fire had been dying the little
white hen had brought some dried grass . The grass had given the fire
new life and always after that he had been the friend of the little
white hen . 

 " O , little white hen , where are you going ? " the fire asked . 

 " Quirrichi , quirrichi , I am going to the royal palace to carry a
letter to the king , " replied the little white hen . 

 " O , little white hen , may I go with you ? " asked the fire .  " I have
never been to the royal palace and I have never had even a peep at the
king . " 

The little white hen told the fire that he might go with her and asked
him to climb into the little brown basket . By this time the little
brown basket was so full , that , try as they might , they couldn ' t make
room for the fire . At last they thought of a plan . The fire changed
himself into ashes and then there was room for him to get into the
basket . 

The little white hen journeyed on and on , and finally she arrived at
the royal palace . 

 " Who are you and what are you carrying in your little brown basket ? " 
asked the royal doorkeeper when he opened the door . 

 " I am the little white hen and I am carrying a letter to the king , " 
replied the little white hen . She didn ' t say a word about the fox and
the river and the fire which she had in her little brown basket . She
was so frightened before the great royal doorkeeper of the palace that
she could hardly find her voice at all . 

The royal doorkeeper invited the little white hen to enter the palace
and he led her to the royal throne where the king was sitting . The
little white hen bowed very low before the king--so low , in fact , that
it mussed up all her feathers . 

 " Who are you and what is your business ? " asked the king in his big , 
deep , kingly voice . 

 " Quirrichi , quirrichi , I am the little white hen , " replied the little
white hen in her low , frightened , little voice .  " I have come to bring
my letter to your royal majesty . " She handed the king the piece of
paper which had remained all this time at the bottom of the little
brown basket . There were marks of dirt upon it where the friendly
fox ' s feet had rested . It was damp where the river had lain . It had
tiny holes in it where the fire had sat after he had turned himself
into hot ashes . 

 " What do you mean by bringing me this dirty piece of paper ? " shouted
the king in his biggest , deepest , gruffest voice .  " I am highly
offended . I always knew that hens were stupid little creatures but you
are quite the stupidest little hen I ever saw in all my life . " 

 " Here , " and he turned to one of the attendants standing by the throne , 
 " take this stupid , little white hen and throw her out into the royal
poultry yard . I think we will have her for dinner to-morrow . " 

The little white hen was roughly seized by the tallest royal attendant
and carried down the back stairs , through the back gate , out into the
royal poultry yard . She still clung to the little brown basket which
she had brought with her on her long journey to the royal palace and
through all the sad experiences she had met there . 

When the little white hen reached the royal poultry yard all the royal
fowls flew at her . Some plucked at her rumpled white feathers . Others
tried to pick out her eyes . One pulled off the cover of the little
brown basket . 

Out sprang the fox from the little brown basket and in the twinkling
of an eye he fell upon the fowls of the royal poultry yard . Not a
single fowl was left alive . 

There was such a great commotion that the king , the queen , the royal
attendants and all the royal servants of the palace came rushing out
to see what was the matter . The fox had already taken to his heels and
the little white hen lost no time in running away too . She did not , 
however , forget to take her little brown basket with her . 

The royal household all ran after her in swift pursuit . They had
almost caught her when the river suddenly sprang out of the little
brown basket and flowed between the little white hen and her royal
pursuers . They couldn ' t get across without canoes . 

While they were getting the canoes and climbing into them the little
white hen had time to run a long way . She had almost reached a thick
forest where she could easily hide herself when the royal pursuers
again drew near . Then the fire which had changed itself into hot ashes
jumped out of the little brown basket . It immediately became dark , so
dark that the royal household could not even see each other ' s faces
and , of course , they could not see in which direction the little
white hen was running . There was nothing for them to do but to return
to the royal palace and live on beef and mutton . 

The fire which had turned itself into ashes sprang out of the little
brown basket so suddenly that it scattered ashes all over the little
white hen . From that day she was always speckled where the ashes fell
upon her . The chickens of the little white hen  ( who was now a little
speckled hen ) were all speckled too . So were their chickens and their
chickens and their chickens ' chickens , even down to this very day . 
Whenever you see a speckled hen you may know that she is descended
from the little white hen who carried a letter to the king , and who , 
in her adventures , became the first speckled hen . 




VIII

How the Monkey Became a

Trickster


Once upon a time there was a beautiful garden in which grew all sorts
of fruits . Many beasts lived in the garden and they were permitted to
eat of the fruits whenever they wished . But they were asked to observe
one rule . They must make a low , polite bow to the fruit tree , call it
by its name , and say ,  " Please give me a taste of your fruit . " They had
to be very careful to remember the tree ' s correct name and not to
forget to say  " please . " It was also very important that they should
remember not to be greedy . They must always leave plenty of fruit for
the other beasts who might pass that way , and plenty to adorn the tree
itself and to furnish seed so that other trees might grow . If they
wished to eat figs they had to say ,  " O , fig tree , O , fig tree , please
give me a taste of your fruit; " or , if they wished to eat oranges they
had to say ,  " O , orange tree , O , orange tree , please give me a taste of
your fruit . " 

In one corner of the garden grew the most splendid tree of all . It was
tall and beautiful and the rosy-cheeked fruit upon its wide spreading
branches looked wonderfully tempting . No beast had ever tasted of that
fruit , for no beast could ever remember its name . 

In a tiny house near the edge of the garden dwelt a little old woman
who knew the names of all the fruit trees which grew in the garden . 
The beasts often went to her and asked the name of the wonderful fruit
tree , but the tree was so far distant from the tiny house of the
little old woman that no beast could ever remember the long , hard name
by the time he reached the fruit tree . 

At last the monkey thought of a trick . Perhaps you do not know it , but
the monkey can play the guitar . He always played when the beasts
gathered together in the garden to dance . The monkey went to the tiny
house of the little old woman , carrying his guitar under his arm . When
she told him the long hard name of the wonderful fruit tree he made up
a little tune to it , all his own , and sang it over and over again all
the way from the tiny house of the little old woman to the corner of
the garden where the wonderful fruit tree grew . When any of the other
beasts met him and asked him what new song he was singing to his
guitar , he said never a word . He marched straight on , playing his
little tune over and over again on his guitar and singing softly the
long hard name . 

At last he reached the corner of the garden where the wonderful fruit
tree grew . He had never seen it look so beautiful . The rosy-cheeked
fruit glowed in the bright sunlight . The monkey could hardly wait to
make his bow , say the long hard name over twice and ask for the fruit
with a  " please . " What a beautiful colour and what a delicious odour
that fruit had ! The monkey had never in all his life been so near to
anything which smelled so good . He took a big bite . What a face he
made ! That beautiful sweet smelling fruit was bitter and sour , and it
had a nasty taste . He threw it away from him as far as he could . 

The monkey never forgot the tree ' s long hard name and the little tune
he had sung . Nor did he forget how the fruit tasted . He never took a
bite of it again; but , after that , his favourite trick was to treat
the other beasts to the wonderful fruit just to see them make faces
when they tasted it . 




IX

How the Monkey and the Goat

Earned Their Reputations


Once upon a time the tiger sent an invitation to the goat asking the
goat to accompany him on a visit . The goat promptly accepted the
invitation and at the appointed day they started on their journey to
the house of the tiger ' s friend . On the way there they came to a
dangerous marsh . The tiger was afraid to cross it , but he pretended to
be very brave . He said to the goat:  " Friend Goat , how very pale you
look when you think about crossing the marsh . Don ' t be afraid . Just go
ahead . " 

The goat assured the tiger that he was no coward . He thrust out his
chest and marched along toward the marsh like a brave soldier . As
soon , however , as he stepped into the marsh , he fell into the mud and
barely got through it alive . The tiger went around the marsh and
walked on dry ground . 

After the tiger and the goat had come together again they came to some
banana trees . The tiger said to the goat:  " Friend Goat , aren ' t you
hungry ? Let us stop here and eat some bananas . You climb up and pluck
the bananas . Give me the ripe ones , and keep the green ones yourself . " 
The goat climbed up and picked the bananas . He gave the ripe ones to
the tiger and the tiger had a good meal . The goat went hungry . 

The tiger and the goat walked along and after going for some distance
they saw a cobra lying in the path .  " Friend Goat , " said the tiger , 
 " here you have the opportunity to procure a beautiful necklace for
your daughter , free of cost . Just pick it up and it is yours . " The
goat started forward to pick up the snake , but the tiger told him to
let it alone if he did not want to be killed . 

When the tiger and the goat arrived at the house of the tiger ' s friend
it was very late . They soon went to bed in hammocks hung close
together . At midnight the tiger rose quietly , walked on tip toe to the
door , opened it , and went out . He hurried to the place where the sheep
were kept , killed the fattest lamb of the flock , and had a feast . Then
he went back to the hammock , wiped the blood on the goat , and went to
sleep . 

Early the next morning the host discovered that one of his lambs was
missing . He hastened to the room where the tiger and the goat were
sleeping and accused the tiger of having killed the lamb . The tiger
looked up at him with an innocent expression and asked ,  " Do you see
any blood on me ? " There was no blood on the tiger , but the host looked
into the next hammock and saw the goat all covered with blood .  " I know
now who killed my fattest lamb , " he said , and he gave the goat such a
beating that the poor goat barely escaped with his life . From that day
to this when one speaks of a person who has been easily imposed upon
he calls him  " the goat . " 

Things happened very differently with the monkey . One day not long
afterward the tiger invited the monkey to accompany him when he went
to visit his friend . The monkey accepted , and the tiger and the monkey
set out on the journey . When they came to the marsh the tiger said to
the monkey ,  " Friend Monkey , how very pale you look when you think
about crossing the marsh . Don ' t be afraid . Just go ahead . " 

 " You go ahead yourself , " replied the monkey . The tiger went through
the marsh and fell into the mud so that he was barely able to get out
again . The monkey went around the marsh and walked on dry ground . 

After a while the tiger and the monkey came to the banana trees . 
 " Friend Monkey , " said the tiger ,  " aren ' t you hungry ? Let us stop here
and eat some bananas . You climb up and pluck the bananas . Give the
ripe ones to me and you may keep the green ones for yourself . " The
monkey climbed up and picked the bananas but he ate all the ripe ones
himself and threw the green ones down to the tiger . The tiger was
forced to go hungry but the monkey had a good meal . 

Finally the tiger and the monkey came to a cobra lying in the path . 
 " Friend Monkey , " said the tiger ,  " here you have the opportunity to
procure a beautiful necklace for your daughter , free of cost . Pick it
up and it is yours . " 

 " Pick it up yourself , " replied the monkey . 

When the tiger and the monkey arrived at the house of the tiger ' s
friend it was very late . They went to bed in hammocks hung up close
together . The monkey had seen enough of the tiger that day to make him
decide that he had better sleep with one eye open . Accordingly he
pretended he was asleep , but he was really awake . At midnight he saw
the tiger crawl quietly out of his hammock , walk on tip toe to the
door , open it gently , and go out . The monkey decided to watch and see
what happened when the tiger came back . 

The tiger went to the place where the sheep were kept , killed the
fattest lamb of the flock and had a feast . When he came back he tried
to wipe the lamb ' s blood on the monkey . The monkey saw him and gave
him a push so that he spilled the blood all over himself and his own
hammock . Not a single drop went on the monkey . 

Early the next morning when the host missed one of his lambs he came
to the room where his guests were sleeping . He saw the tiger all
covered with blood and he cried ,  " O ho , I have at last caught the one
who kills my lambs . " Then he gave the tiger such a beating that he
barely escaped with his life . It was all he could do to crawl home
again . 




X

How the Monkey Got a Drink

When He Was Thirsty


Once upon a time the monkey made the tiger very angry . This is how it
happened . The monkey was seated high up among the leafy branches of a
mango tree playing upon his guitar . The tiger passed that way and lay
down under the tree to rest . Just to tease him the monkey played and
sang this little song:

  " _Tango ti tar , tango ti tar , 
 The tiger ' s bones are in my guitar . 
 Tee hee , Tee hee . _ " 

The tiger was very angry .  " Just wait until I catch you , Mr . Monkey , " 
he said .  " Then I ' ll show you a trick or two with bones . " 

The monkey leaped from one tree to another keeping himself so well hid
by the foliage that the tiger could not see him . Then he came down out
of the trees and hid himself in a hole in the ground . When the tiger
came near he again played and sang his little song:

  " _Tango ti tar , tango ti tar , 
 The tiger ' s bones are in my guitar . 
 Tee hee , Tee hee . _ " 

The tiger put his paw into the hole and caught the monkey ' s leg .  " Oh , 
ho , Mr . Tiger ! " said the monkey .  " You think that you have caught my
leg but what you really have is just a little stick . Oh , ho ! Oh , ho ! " 
Then the tiger let go of the monkey ' s leg . 

The monkey crawled farther back into the hole in the ground where the
tiger ' s paw could not reach him . Then he said:  " Thank you so much , Mr . 
Tiger , for letting go of my leg . It really was my leg , you know . " 
Again he played and sang his little song:

  " _Tango ti tar , tango ti tar , 
 The tiger ' s bones are in my guitar . 
 Tee hee , Tee hee . _ " 

The tiger was angrier than ever . He waited and waited for the monkey
to come out of the hole in the ground but the monkey did not come . He
had discovered another way out and once more from the high tree tops
he sang down to the waiting tiger:

  " _Tango ti tar , tango ti tar , 
 The tiger ' s bones are in my guitar . 
 Tee hee , Tee hee . _ " 

There had been a great drought in the land and there was only one
watering place where the beasts could drink . The tiger knew that the
monkey would have to go there when he was thirsty so he decided to
wait for him and catch him when he came to drink . 

When the monkey went to the watering place to get a drink he found the
tiger there waiting for him . He ran away as fast as the wind for he
was really very much afraid of the tiger . 

He waited and waited until he thought he should die of thirst , but the
tiger did not go away from the watering place for a single minute . At
last the monkey thought of a trick by which he would be able to get a
drink . 

He lay down by the side of the pathway as if he were dead . After a
while an old woman came along the path carrying a dish of honey in a
basket upon her head . She saw the monkey lying there by the path and , 
thinking that he was dead , she picked him up and put him into the
basket with the dish of honey . When the monkey saw that it was honey
in the dish he was very happy . He opened the dish and covered himself
all over with the soft sticky honey . Then as the old woman walked
under the trees he lightly sprang out of the basket into the trees . 
The old woman did not miss him until she got home and found only part
of her dish of honey in the basket .  " Why , I thought I had brought
home a dead monkey in my basket , " she said to her children .  " Now
there is no monkey here and my dish is only half full of honey . The
monkey must have been playing one of his tricks . " 

The monkey had , in the meantime , stuck leaves from the trees into the
honey all over his body so that he was completely disguised . His own
mother would never have recognised him . He looked something like a
porcupine; but instead of sharp quills there were green leaves
sticking out all over him . In this fashion he went to the drinking
place and the tiger did not recognise him . He took a long , deep drink . 
He was so thirsty and the water tasted so good that he stayed in the
drinking place too long . The leaves came out of the honey which had
held them and the tiger saw that it was really the monkey . The monkey
was barely able to escape . 

He was so badly frightened that he waited and waited a long , long time
before he again went to the drinking place . At last he got so thirsty
that he couldn ' t wait any longer . He went to the resin tree and
covered himself with resin . Then he stuck leaves into the resin and
again went to the drinking place . 

The tiger saw him , but as the tiger expected to see the leaves come
off just as soon as the monkey got into the water , he thought he would
wait and catch him in his bare skin . This time the leaves did not come
off , for the resin held them fast and was not in the least affected by
the water . The tiger thought that it was not the monkey and that he
must have made a mistake . The monkey drank all he wished and then
strolled away leisurely without the tiger ' s attacking him . He used the
resin and leaves every time he wanted a drink after that . He kept up
the trick until the rainy season arrived and he could find plenty of
water in other places than the big drinking place . 




XI

How the Monkey Got Food

When He Was Hungry


Once upon a time the monkey was hungry . He wanted to make some
porridge , but he did not have any money to buy meal to make the
porridge . So he went to the house of the hen to borrow some meal . The
hen gave him some meal . 

 " Come to my house to-morrow at one o ' clock , " he said to the hen ,  " I ' ll
pay back the meal then . " 

Then the monkey went to the house of the fox and said ,  " O , friend fox , 
please lend me some meal . Come to my house to-morrow at two o ' clock
and I ' ll pay you then . " The fox gave him some meal . 

Then the monkey went to the house of the dog and said ,  " O , friend dog , 
please lend me some meal . Come to my house to-morrow at three o ' clock
and I ' ll pay you back then . " The dog gave him some meal . 

Then the monkey went to the house of the tiger and said ,  " O , friend
tiger , please lend me some meal . Come to my house to-morrow at four
o ' clock and I ' ll pay you back then . " The tiger gave the monkey some
meal . 

The monkey went home and made a great pot of porridge . He feasted and
feasted until he couldn ' t eat any more , but there was still plenty of
porridge left in the pot . Then the monkey made his bed and took care
to fix it high up from the floor . 

The next day , at midday , he ate some more of the porridge . Then he
bound a cloth about his head and went to bed pretending that he was
sick . 

At one o ' clock the hen came and knocked at the door . The monkey in a
low , weak voice asked her to enter . He told her how very sick he was
and the hen was very sorry for him . 

At two o ' clock the fox came and knocked at the door . The hen was
frightened almost to death .  " Never mind , " said the monkey ,  " you can
hide here under my bed . " 

The hen hid under the monkey ' s bed and the monkey in a weak , low voice
invited the fox to enter . The monkey told the fox how very ill he was
and the fox was very sorry for him . 

At three o ' clock the dog came and knocked at the door . The fox was
frightened almost to death .  " Never mind , " said the monkey;  " hide here
under my bed and everything will be all right . " 

The fox hid under the monkey ' s bed and the monkey , in a low , weak
voice , invited the dog to enter . The monkey told the dog how very sick
he was and the dog was very sorry for him . 

At four the tiger came and knocked at the door . The dog was frightened
almost to death .  " Never mind , " said the monkey .  " Hide here under my
bed and everything will be all right . " 

The dog hid under the monkey ' s bed . Then the monkey invited the tiger
to enter . He told , the tiger how very sick he was but the tiger was
not at all sorry for him . He sprang at the bed , demanding in a loud , 
fierce voice that the monkey pay back the meal at once , as he had
promised to do . The monkey escaped to the tree tops , but the bed broke
down under the tiger ' s weight . 

Then the fox ate up the hen and the dog ate up the fox and the tiger
ate up the dog . The tiger is still trying to catch the monkey . 




XII

Why the Bananas Belong to

the Monkey


Perhaps you do not know it , but the monkeys think that all the bananas
belong to them . When Brazilian children eat bananas they say ,  " I am a
monkey . " I once knew a little boy in Brazil who was very , very fond of
bananas . He always said ,  " I am _very much_ of a monkey . " If you are
fond of bananas the Brazilian children would tell you that you are a
monkey , too . This is the story they tell to show us how it all came
about . 

Once upon a time when the world had just been made and there was only
one kind of banana , but very many kinds of monkeys , there was a little
old woman who had a big garden full of banana trees . It was very
difficult for the old woman to gather the bananas herself , so she made
a bargain with the largest monkey . She told him that if he would
gather the bunches of bananas for her she would give him half of them . 
The monkey gathered the bananas . When he took his half he gave the
little old woman the bananas which grow at the bottom of the bunch and
are small and wrinkled . The nice big fat ones he kept for himself and
carried them home to let them ripen in the dark . 

The little old woman was very angry . She lay awake all night trying to
think of some way by which she could get even with the monkey . At
last she thought of a trick . 

The next morning she made an image of wax which looked just like a
little black boy . Then she placed a large flat basket on the top of
the image ' s head and in the basket she placed the best ripe bananas
she could find . They certainly looked very tempting . 

After a little while the biggest monkey passed that way . He saw the
image of wax and thought that it was a boy peddling bananas . He had
often pushed over boy banana peddlers , upset their baskets and then
had run away with the bananas . This morning he was feeling very
good-natured so he thought that he would first try asking politely for
the bananas . 

 " O , peddler boy , peddler boy , " he said to him ,  " please give me a
banana . " The image of wax answered never a word . 

Again the monkey said , this time in a little louder voice ,  " O , peddler
boy , peddler boy , please give me a banana , just one little , ripe
little , sweet little banana . " The image of wax answered never a word . 

Then the monkey called out in his loudest voice ,  " O , peddler boy , 
peddler boy , if you don ' t give me a banana I ' ll give you such a push
that it will upset all of your bananas . " The image of wax was silent . 

The monkey ran toward the image of wax and struck it hard with his
hand . His hand remained firmly embedded in the wax . 

 " O , peddler boy , peddler boy , let go my hand , " the monkey called out . 
 " Let go my hand and give me a banana or else I ' ll give you a hard , 
hard blow with my other hand . " The image of wax did not let go . 

The monkey gave the image a hard , hard blow with his other hand . The
other hand remained firmly embedded in the wax . 

Then the monkey called out ,  " O , peddler boy , peddler boy , let go my
two hands . Let go my two hands and give me a banana or else I will
give you a kick with my foot . " The image of wax did not let go . 

The monkey gave the image a kick with his foot and his foot remained
stuck fast in the wax . 

 " O , peddler boy , peddler boy , " the monkey cried ,  " let go my foot . Let
go my two hands and my foot and give me a banana or else I ' ll give
you a kick with my other foot . " The image of wax did not let go . 

Then the monkey who was now very angry , gave the image of wax a kick
with his foot and his foot remained stuck fast in the wax . 

The monkey shouted ,  " O , peddler boy , peddler boy , let go my foot . Let
go my two feet and my two hands and give me a banana or else I ' ll give
you a push with my body . " The image of wax did not let go . 

The monkey gave the image of wax a push with his body . His body
remained caught fast in the wax . 

 " O , peddler boy , peddler boy , " the monkey shouted ,  " let go my body ! 
Let go my body and my two feet and my two hands or I ' ll call all the
other monkeys to help me ! " The image of wax did not let go . 

Then the monkey made such an uproar with his cries and shouts that
very soon monkeys came running from all directions . There were big
monkeys and little monkeys and middle-sized monkeys . A whole army of
monkeys had come to the aid of the biggest monkey . 

It was the very littlest monkey who thought of a plan to help the
biggest monkey out of his plight . The monkeys were to climb up into
the biggest tree and pile themselves one on top of another until they
made a pyramid of monkeys . The monkey with the very loudest voice of
all was to be on top and he was to shout his very loudest to the sun
and ask the sun to come and help the biggest monkey out of his
dreadful difficulty . 

This is what all the big-sized , little-sized , middle-sized monkeys
did . The monkey with the loudest voice on top of the pyramid made the
sun hear . The sun came at once . 

The sun poured his hottest rays down upon the wax . After a while the
wax began to melt . The monkey was at last able to pull out one of his
hands . The sun poured down more of his hottest rays and soon the
monkey was able to pull out his two hands . Then he could pull out one
foot , then another , and in a little while his body , too . At last he
was free . 

When the little old woman saw what had happened she was very much
discouraged about raising bananas . She decided to move to another
part of the world where she raised cabbages instead of bananas . The
monkeys were left in possession of the big garden full of banana
trees . From that day to this the monkeys have thought that they own
all the bananas . 




XIII

How the Monkey Escaped

Being Eaten


Once upon a time , ages and ages ago , people ate fruits and nuts . Then
there came a time when the fruits and nuts became scarce . People had
to eat meat . So they began killing the various beasts to see which
ones were the best to eat . They skinned them and cut them in pieces
and cooked them over the fire . Some of the beasts were good to eat and
others were not good at all . 

The ox was found to be very good , and so was the sheep , and the
armadillo . Then one day a man thought that he would try to eat the
monkey . 

The monkey was playing his guitar .  " Lee , lee , lee , lee , lee lay , lee
lay , lee ray , lee ray . " The man came close to him and said ,  " Come
here , little monkey , and let me hear your music . I enjoy it very
much . " All the time the man was coming closer and closer to the
monkey . Just as he was about to stretch out his hand and seize the
monkey , the monkey gave a sudden leap to the tree and hurried away to
the tree top . 

After that every time the man heard the monkey play the guitar he
would come near and try to catch him . The monkey grew afraid of the
man , so afraid that he gave up playing his guitar at all . For a long , 
long time he did not play upon it . One day he felt that he just _must_
have some music . He hid in a hole in the ground and there he played
upon his guitar . He did not think that the man would hear him , but the
man had very sharp ears . When he got through playing he started to
come out of the hole in the ground . There was the man waiting for him ! 
He crawled quickly back , --so far back that the man could not catch
him . The monkey waited and waited for the man to go away , but the man
did not go away . 

After a while the man became thirsty and went to get a drink . He left
his little boy in his place to watch for the monkey . After the man had
gone away the monkey called out to the little boy ,  " O , little boy , O , 
little boy , don ' t you wish that you could see the monkey dance ? " 

The little boy replied that he wished he could . 

 " Just put your eyes down to the door of my little cave , and I ' ll let
you see the monkey dance , little boy , " said the monkey . 

The little boy put his eyes down close to the hole in the ground . No
sooner had he done so than the monkey threw dirt into the little boy ' s
eyes . When the little boy was rubbing his eyes to get the dirt out of
them the monkey made a sudden dash out of the cave and escaped to the
tree tops . When the man returned the little boy did not dare to tell
him that the monkey had escaped . The man waited and waited and waited
there by the hole in the ground . At last he became tired of waiting
and went away . 

After that the man tried harder than ever to catch the monkey . If he
had not had the good luck to catch the monkey napping one day there is
no knowing when he would have got his hands upon him . One day , 
however , he caught the monkey napping . He shut him up in a box and
carried him home to the children for supper . 

The man put a big dish full of water over the fire ready to cook the
monkey . Then he went away to collect more fuel for the fire . The
monkey and his guitar were shut up in the box , and there , inside the
box , the monkey played on his guitar .  " Lee , lee , lee , lee , lee lay , 
lee lay , lee ray , lee ray . " The children came crowding close to the
box . 

 " O , children , O , children , " said the monkey ,  " don ' t you wish that you
could see the monkey dance ? " 

The children replied that they wished they could . 

 " This box is so small that there is not room enough for me to dance
here , " said the monkey .  " Just let me out and I ' ll show you how well I
can dance . " 

The children opened the box and let the monkey out into the room . The
monkey played on his guitar ,  " Lee , lee , lee , lee , lee lay , lee lay , 
lee ray , lee ray , " and he danced about the room . Then he said ,  " O , 
children ! O , children ! You have nothing at all cooking in that pot
over the fire . Let us put something into the pot to cook . " 

The children thought that it would not be polite to tell the monkey
what the pot of water was waiting for , so they let the monkey fill
the pot as he liked . He put into it some little dry sticks and an
empty cocoanut shell . Then he said ,  " O , children , O , children , I
cannot dance any more . It is so hot here in this room . " 

The children begged him to dance some more . 

 " If you will open the door a little bit so that I can have more air to
breathe I ' ll show you a new dance , " said the monkey . 

The children opened the door . The monkey danced over to the door and
out of the door away to the tree top . That was the last they ever saw
of him . He moved to another part of the country after that experience . 

When the man came home with fuel for the fire the children did not
dare to tell him that the monkey had escaped . They let him think that
the sticks and the cocoanut shell in the pot was the monkey . He built
a big roaring fire under the pot and soon it was boiling merrily . 
After the pot had boiled a while he called the children to come to
supper with him . The children let him taste first . He fished a hard
stick out of the pot and bit into it .  " This is not the monkey ' s leg . 
It is just a dry stick , " he said , as he made a wry face . Then he
fished the empty cocoanut shell out of the pot .  " That is not the
monkey ' s head , " he said as he tasted it ,  " That is just an empty
cocoanut shell . " He couldn ' t find a single trace of the monkey in that
monkey stew . He never wished to make a monkey stew again . 




XIV

Why the Monkey Still Has

a Tail


Once upon a time the monkey and the rabbit made a contract . The monkey
was to kill all the butterflies and the rabbit was to kill all the
snakes . 

One day the rabbit was taking a nap when the monkey passed that way . 
The monkey thought that he would play a trick on the rabbit so he
pulled the rabbit ' s ears , pretending that he thought they were
butterflies . The rabbit awoke very angry at the monkey and he plotted
how he might revenge himself on the monkey . 

The rabbit and the armadillo are very good friends . The armadillo is
very , very strong , you know , so it was he whom the rabbit asked to
help him . 

One day the rabbit caught the monkey napping . He had watched and
waited a long , long time to catch the monkey napping , but at last he
succeeded . Even the monkey sometimes takes a nap . The rabbit called
the armadillo at once and together they rolled a big stone upon the
monkey ' s tail . The monkey pulled so hard to get his tail out from
under the stone that it broke off . The cat , who at that time had no
tail of her own , spied the tail and ran away with it . The monkey was
very angry at the rabbit .  " O , we thought it was just a snake lying
there , " said the rabbit .  " When you pulled my ears , you know , you
thought they were butterflies . " 

That did not help the monkey to feel any better . How was he to live
without his tail ! How could he climb without it ! He simply had to have
it back so he at once set out to find the cat . 

At last he found the cat and said to her ,  " O , kind cat , please give me
back my tail . " 

 " I will give it to you , " replied the cat ,  " if you will get me some
milk . " 

 " Where shall I get the milk ? " asked the monkey . 

 " Go ask the cow for some , " replied the cat . 

The monkey went to the cow and said ,  " O , kind cow , please give me some
milk that I may give the milk to the cat so that the cat will give
back my tail to me . " 

 " I will give you the milk , " replied the cow ,  " if you will get me some
grass . " 

 " Where shall I get the grass ? " asked the monkey . 

 " Go ask the farmer , " responded the cow . 

The monkey went to the farmer and said ,  " O , kind farmer , please give
me some grass that I may give the grass to the cow so that the cow
will give me some milk so that I may give the milk to the cat so that
the cat will give back my tail to me . " 

The farmer said ,  " I will give you some grass if you will give me some
rain . " 

 " Where shall I get the rain ? " asked the monkey . 

 " Go ask the clouds , " responded the farmer . 

The monkey went to the clouds and said ,  " O , kind clouds , please send
me down some rain that I may give the rain to the farmer so that the
farmer will give me some grass so that I may give the grass to the cow
so that the cow will give me some milk so that I may give the milk to
the cat so that the cat will give me back my tail . " 

 " I will give you some rain , " replied the clouds ,  " if you will get me
some fog . " 

 " Where shall I get the fog ? " asked the monkey . 

 " Go ask the rivers , " replied the clouds . 

The monkey went to the river and said ,  " O , kind river , please give me
a fog that I may give the fog to the clouds so that the clouds will
give some rain so that I may give the rain to the farmer so that the
farmer will give me some grass so that I may give the grass to the cow
so that the cow will give me some milk so that I may give the milk to
the cat so that the cat will give me back my tail . " 

 " I will give you a fog , " replied the river ,  " if you will find a new
spring to feed me . " 

 " Where shall I find a spring ? " asked the monkey . 

 " Go search for one among the rocks upon the hillside , " replied the
river . 

Then the monkey climbed up the steep hill and searched and searched
among the rocks until at last he found a little spring to feed the
river . He brought the spring to the river and the river gave him a
fog . He took the fog to the clouds and the clouds gave him rain . He
took the rain to the farmer and the farmer gave him grass . He took the
grass to the cow and the cow gave him milk . He took the milk to the
cat and the cat gave him back his tail . The monkey was so glad to have
his tail again that he danced and danced with glee . Ever since that
time the monkey has been very careful to guard his tail . He still has
one and he is still happy because of it . 


