One often hears the saying that one cannot make black white or white
black . I said something about it once upon a time to my Brazilian
_ama_ and she stared at me in surprise . "O , yes , one can , " she said . 
"It happened once and no one can ever tell but that it may happen
again . Perhaps the _Senhora_ has not heard the story ? " I begged her to
tell me the story and this is the tale:

Once upon a time there was a little old woman who lived all alone with
her little black son who was just as black as black can be . The little
old woman had not always lived alone with the little black boy . She
had once been the mother of three beautiful daughters , the very
loveliest maidens in all the country round . They were so handsome that
they attracted the attention of the wicked fairy who lived in an
enchanted castle nearby , and this fairy had been very jealous of them . 
By the aid of magic she tied them up in sacks which could be opened
only by burning the sacks over a fire built from magic wood . The
little old woman and her little black son searched long and diligently
for magic wood , but they were never able to find any . 

It was a terrible thing to have one's daughters shut up in magic
sacks . The little old woman had grown bent and weak and cross in her
search to find the magic wood . If it had not been for the little
black boy she would have given up entirely . The little black boy was
always gay and cheerful and always sure that some day they would
succeed in finding the magic wood . 

One day the little old woman took her big water jar upon her head and
carried it down to the stream to fill . It was so very heavy when she
had filled it with water that she could not lift it to her head even
with the help of the little black boy . Three fine looking
_cavalheiros_ happened to be passing on horseback . She sent the little
black boy to ask them if they would help her . They said they couldn't
possibly stop . The little old woman was very angry . She did not know
that they were on their way to the magic castle and _couldn't_ stop . 
The same wicked fairy who had shut the little old woman's beautiful
daughters up in the sacks , was leading them on . 

If the little old woman had known all about the three _cavalheiros_
she would not have been angry . She would have wanted to help them
instead . The three _cavalheiros_ were very good and very wise , so they
managed to get along very well . As soon as they reached the enchanted
castle the fairy showed them to their beds . She had marked each bed
with a candle . No one before had ever been wise enough to blow out
these candles . These _cavalheiros_ blew out the candles and that took
away the fairy's power over them . They were able to escape from the
palace . When the wicked fairy came to put them in her magic sacks she
found the beds empty . 

The three _cavalheiros_ took their horses and rode back by the same
road by which they had come . They stopped at a little shop on a corner
which was kept by a good fairy and bought one _vintem's_ worth of
ashes , one _vintem's_ worth of salt and one _vintem's_ worth of pins . 

After a while the three _cavalheiros_ approached the house of the
little old woman and the little black boy . The little old woman was
still angry because they had refused to stop and help her lift her
water jar to her head . When she saw them coming she threw stones at
them . Of course that was a very stupid thing to do . 

When the three _cavalheiros_ saw what was happening they were greatly
surprised . They had forgotten all about the little black boy and the
little old woman whom he had asked them to help . When they saw her
coming with the stones they thought that she must be a wicked fairy in
the form of a little old woman . 

The _cavalheiro_ who had one _vintem's_ worth of ashes in his pocket
threw the ashes at her . It became night . The little old woman came on
with her stones just the same . 

The _cavalheiro_ who had one _vintem's_ worth of salt in his pocket
threw the salt at her . Immediately a sea of salt water appeared
between the three _cavalheiros_ and the little old woman . The little
old woman came on with her stones just the same . 

The _cavalheiro_ who had one _vintem's_ worth of pins in his pocket
threw the pins at her . Immediately a high , thorny hedge sprang out of
the ground between the little old woman and the three _cavalheiros_ . 

The little old woman was too angry to think clearly . If she had not
been so angry she would have known at once that this must be magic
wood . The little black boy , however , had his wits about him . He
hastened to gather the branches even though the thorns tore his hands . 
Soon he had brought together a great pile of wood like the piles which
they make in the streets to burn on a _festa_ night . 

The little old woman saw what he was doing and ran to get the magic
sacks in which her daughters were imprisoned . They laid the sacks on
top of the pile of magic wood and lighted the fire . There was a great
noise like thunder . Out of the three magic sacks there sprang three
beautiful maidens who had been preserved alive in the sacks by a
miracle of _Nossa Senhora_ . 

The little old woman and her three beautiful daughters turned to thank
the little black boy for what he had done . The little black boy was no
longer black . He had been turned white . 

The three _cavalheiros_ married the three beautiful maidens and the
little boy who was now white , grew up to be the greatest _cavalheiro_
of them all . 




XVI

How the Pigeon Became a

Tame Bird


Once upon a time there was a father with three sons who had reached
the age when they must go out into the world to earn their own living . 
When the time for parting came he gave to each of them a large melon
with the advice that they open the melons only at a place where there
was water nearby . 

The three brothers set out from their father's house , each taking a
different path . As soon as the eldest son was out of sight of the
house he opened his melon . A beautiful maiden sprang out of the melon
saying , "Give me water or give me milk . " There was no water nearby and
neither did the young man have any milk to give her . She fell down
dead . 

The second son left his father's house by a path which led over a
steep hill . The large melon was heavy to carry and in a little while
he became very tired and thirsty . He saw no water nearby and feared
that there was no possibility of finding any soon , so he thought he
would open the melon and use it to quench his thirst . Accordingly he
opened his melon . To his great surprise , a beautiful maiden sprang
forth saying , "Give me water or give me milk . " Of course he had
neither to give her and she fell down dead . 

The third son also travelled by a path which led over a steep hill . 
He , too , became very tired and thirsty and he often thought how much
he would like to open his melon . However , he remembered his father's
advice to open it only where there was water nearby . So he travelled
on and on hoping to find a spring of water on the hillside . He did not
have the good fortune to pass near a spring either going up the hill
or coming down on the opposite side . At the foot of the hill there was
a town and in the centre of the town there was a fountain . The young
man hurried straight to the fountain and took a long refreshing drink . 
Then he opened his melon . A beautiful maiden sprang forth saying , 
"Give me water or give me milk . " The young man gave her a drink of
water . Then he helped her to a hiding place among the thick branches
of the tree which grew beside the fountain and went away in search of
food . 

Soon a little black servant girl came to the fountain to fill a big
water jar which she carried on her head . The maiden in the tree above
the fountain peeped out through the branches . When the little black
servant girl bent over the water to fill her jar she saw the
reflection of a charming face in the water . "How beautiful I have
become , " she said to herself . "How ridiculous that any one as
beautiful as I am should carry water on her head . " She threw her water
jar upon the ground in disdain and it broke into a thousand pieces . 

When the little maid reached home with neither water nor water jar her
mistress punished her severely and sent her again to the fountain
with a new water jar to fill . This time the maiden in the tree gave a
little silvery laugh when the black servant girl bent over the water . 
The little maid looked up and spied her in the tree . "O , it is you , is
it , who are responsible for my beating ? " she said . She pulled a pin
out of her camisa and , reaching up , she stuck it savagely into the
beautiful maiden in the tree . Then a strange thing happened . There was
no longer any beautiful maiden in the tree . There was just a pigeon
there . 

At that moment the young man came back to the tree with the food he
had procured . When the little black maid heard his footsteps she was
frightened nearly to death . She hid herself quickly among the thick
branches of the tree . The young man was very much surprised to find a
little black maid in the tree in the place of the beautiful maiden he
had left there . "What has happened to you during my absence" he asked
in horror as soon as he saw her . "The sun has burned my complexion . 
That is all . It is nothing . I shall be myself again when I get away
from this hot place , " the little maid replied . 

The young man married the little black maid and took her away out of
sunny places hoping that she would soon be again the beautiful maiden
she was when he left her by the fountain in search of food . But she
always remained black . 

Years passed and the young man became very rich . He lived in a
beautiful mansion . All around the house there was a wonderful garden
full of lovely flowers and splendid trees where birds loved to sing
sweet songs and build their nests . In spite of his beautiful home the
young man was not very happy . It was a great trial to have a wife who
was so black . He often walked up and down the paths in his garden at
the close of the day and thought about how beautiful his wife had been
the first time he ever saw her . As he walked in the garden there was
always a pigeon which followed him about . It flew about his head in a
way that annoyed him , so one day when his wife was sick and asked for
a pigeon to be roasted for her dinner he commanded that this
particular pigeon should be killed . 

When the cook was preparing the pigeon for her mistress to eat for
dinner she noticed a black speck on the pigeon's breast . She thought
that it was a speck of dirt and tried to brush it away . To her
surprise she could not brush it off easily because it was a pin firmly
embedded in the pigeon's breast . She pulled and pulled but could not
pull it out so she sent for her master to come and see what he could
do to remove it . He at once pulled out the pin and then a wonderful
thing happened . The pigeon was transformed into a beautiful maiden . He
at once recognised her as the same lovely maiden who had sprung forth
from his melon by the fountain and whom he had left hidden in the
tree . 

When the young man's black wife learned that her husband had found the
beautiful maiden again after all these years she confessed her deceit
and soon died . The young man married the beautiful maiden who was
still just as beautiful as she was the first time he saw her . They
were very happy together but the wife never forgot about the time she
had been a pigeon . 

Up to that time pigeons had been wild birds who built their nests in
the deep forest . The wife often wished that they would build their
nests in her beautiful garden so she had little bird houses built and
set up there . 

One day a pigeon , bolder than the rest , flew through the garden and
spied the little bird houses . He moved his family there at once and
told the other pigeons that there were other houses there for them
too . The other pigeons were timid and so they waited to see what
terrible calamity might happen to the bold pigeon and his family , but
not a single unpleasant thing occurred . They were just as happy as
happy could be in their new home . 

After a while other pigeon families moved into the garden and were
happy too . Thus it came about that after years and years the pigeons
no longer build their nests in the deep forest , but they always make
their homes near the homes of men . The pigeons , themselves , do not
know how it all came about , but the beautiful woman who was once a
pigeon , when she had children of her own , told them about it , and they
told their children . Thus it happens that the mothers in Brazil tell
their children this story about the pigeon . 


