Once upon a time there was a little princess who lived in a
magnificent royal palace . All around the palace there was a beautiful
garden full of lovely flowers and rare shrubs and trees . The part of
the garden which the princess liked most of all was a corner of it
which ran down to the sea . She was a very lonely little princess and
she loved to sit and watch the changing beauty of the sea . The name of
the little princess was Dionysia and it often seemed to her that the
sea said , as it rushed against the shore ,  " Di-o-ny-si-a , 
Di-o-ny-si-a . " 

One day when the little princess was sitting all alone by the sea she
said to herself ,  " O ! I am so lonely . I do so wish that I had somebody
to play with . When I ride out in the royal chariot I see little girls
who have other little boys and girls to play with them . Because I am
the royal princess I never have anybody to play with me . If I have to
be the royal princess and not play with other children I do think I
might have some sort of live thing to play with me . " 

Then a most remarkable thing happened . The sea said very slowly and
distinctly and over and over again so there couldn ' t be any mistake
about it ,  " Di-o-ny-si-a , Di-o-ny-si-a . " 

The little princess walked up close to the sea , just as close as she
dared to go without danger of getting her royal shoes and stockings
wet . Straight out of the biggest wave of all there came a sea serpent
to meet her . She knew that it was a sea serpent from the pictures in
her royal story books even though she had never seen a sea serpent
before , but somehow this sea serpent looked different than the
pictures . Instead of being a fierce monster it looked kind and gentle
and good . She held out her arms to it right away . 

 " Come play with me , " said Dionysia . 

 " I am Labismena and I have come to play with you , " replied the sea
serpent . 

After that the little princess was very much happier . The sea serpent
came out of the sea to play with her every day when she was alone . If
any one else came near Labismena would disappear into the sea so no
one but Dionysia ever saw her . 

The years passed rapidly and each year the little princess grew to be
a larger and larger princess . At last she was sixteen years old and a
very grown-up princess indeed . She still enjoyed her old playmate , 
Labismena , and they were often together on the seashore . 

One day when they were walking up and down together beside the sea the
sea serpent looked at Dionysia with sad eyes and said ,  " I too have
been growing older all these years , dear Dionysia . Now the time has
come that we can no longer play together . I shall never come out of
the sea to play with you any more , but I shall never forget you and I
shall always be your friend . I hope that you will never have any
trouble , but if you ever should , call my name and I will come to help
you . " Then the sea serpent disappeared into the sea . 

About this time the wife of a neighbouring king died and as she lay
upon her death bed she gave the king a jewelled ring .  " When the time
comes when you wish to wed again , " she said ,  " I ask you to marry a
princess upon whose finger this ring shall be neither too tight nor
too loose . " 

After a while the king began to look about for a princess to be his
bride . He visited many royal palaces and tried the ring upon the
finger of many royal princesses . Upon some the ring was too tight and
upon others it was too loose . There was no princess whose finger it
fitted perfectly . 

At last in his search the king came to the royal palace where the
princess Dionysia lived . The princess had dreams of her own of a young
and charming prince who would some day come to wed her , so she was not
pleased at all . The king was old and no longer handsome , and when he
tried the ring upon Dionysia ' s finger she hoped with all her heart
that it would not fit . It fitted perfectly . 

The princess Dionysia was frightened nearly to death .  " Will I really
have to marry him ? " she asked her royal father . Her father told her
what a very wealthy king he was with a great kingdom and a wonderful
royal palace ever so much more wonderful and grand than the palace
the princess Dionysia had always had for her home . Her father had no
patience at all with her for not being happy about it .  " You ought to
consider yourself the most fortunate princess in all the world , " he
said . 

Dionysia spent her days and nights weeping . Her father was afraid that
she would grow so thin that the ring would no longer fit her finger , 
so he hastened the plans for the wedding . 

One day Dionysia walked up and down beside the sea , crying as if her
heart would break . All at once she stopped crying .  " How stupid I have
been , " she said .  " My old playmate Labismena told me that if ever I was
in trouble she would come back and help me . With all my silly crying I
had forgotten about it . " 

Dionysia walked up close to the sea and called softly ,  " Labismena , 
Labismena . " Out of the sea came the sea serpent just as she used to
come . The princess told the sea serpent all about the dreadful trouble
which was threatening to spoil her life . 

 " Have no fear , " said Labismena ,  " tell your father that you will marry
the king when the king presents you with a dress the colour of the
fields and all their flowers and that you will not marry him until he
gives it to you . " Then the sea serpent disappeared again into the sea . 

Dionysia sent word through her father to her royal suitor that she
would wed him only when he procured her a dress the colour of the
fields and all their flowers . The king was very much in love with
Dionysia , so he was secretly filled with joy at this request . He
searched everywhere for a dress the colour of the fields and all their
flowers . It was a very difficult thing to find but at last he procured
one . He sent it to Dionysia at once . 

When Dionysia saw that the king had really found the dress for her she
was filled with grief . She thought that there was no escape and that
she would have to marry the king after all . As soon as she could get
away from the palace without being noticed she ran down to the sea and
again called ,  " Labismena , Labismena . " 

The sea serpent at once came out of the sea .  " Do not fear , " she said
to Dionysia .  " Go back and say that you will not wed the king until he
gives you a dress the colour of the sea and all its fishes . " 

When the king heard this new request of Dionysia ' s he was rather
discouraged . However he searched for the dress and , at last , after
expending a great sum of money , he procured such a gown . 

When Dionysia saw that a dress the colour of the sea and all its
fishes had been found for her she again went to seek counsel from her
old playmate .  " Do not be afraid , " Labismena again said to her .  " This
time you must ask the king to get you a dress the colour of the sky
and all its stars . You may also tell him that this is the last present
you will ask him to make you . " 

When the king heard about the demand for a dress the colour of the sky
and all its stars he was completely disheartened , but when he heard
that Dionysia had promised that this would be the last present she
would ask he decided that it might be a good investment after all . He
set out to procure the dress with all possible speed . At last he found
one . 

When Dionysia saw the dress the colour of the sky and all its stars
she thought that this time there was no escape from marrying the king . 
She called the sea serpent with an anxious heart for she was afraid
that now even Labismena could do nothing to help her . 

Labismena came out of the sea in answer to her call . 

 " Go home to the palace and get your dress the colour of the field and
all its flowers , " said the sea serpent ,  " and your dress the colour of
the sea and all its fishes , and your dress the colour of the sky and
all its stars . Then hurry back here to the sea for I have been
preparing a surprise for you . " 

All the time the king had been procuring the wonderful gowns for
Dionysia the sea serpent had been building a ship for her . When
Dionysia returned from the royal palace with her lovely dresses all
carefully packed in a box there was a queer little boat awaiting her . 
It was not at all like any other boat she had ever seen and she was
almost afraid to get into it when Labismena asked her to try it .  " This
little ship which I have built for you , " said Labismena ,  " will carry
you far away over the sea to the kingdom of a prince who is the most
charming prince in all the world . When you see him you will want to
marry him above all others . " 

 " O , Labismena ! How can I ever thank you for all you have done for
me ? " cried Dionysia . 

 " You can do the greatest thing in the world for me , " said Labismena;
 " though I have never told you and I do not believe that you have ever
suspected it , I am really an enchanted princess . I shall have to
remain in the form of a sea serpent until the happiest maiden in all
the world , at the hour of her greatest happiness , calls my name three
times . You will be the very happiest girl in all the world on the day
of your marriage , and if you will remember to call my name three times
then you will break my enchantment and I shall once more be a lovely
princess instead of a sea serpent . " 

Dionysia promised her friend that she would remember to do this . The
sea serpent asked her to promise three times to make sure . When
Dionysia had promised three times and again embraced her old playmate
and thanked her for all that she had done she sailed away in the
little ship . The sea serpent disappeared into the sea . 

Dionysia sailed and sailed in the little ship and at last it bore her
to a lovely island . She thought that she had reached her destination , 
so she stepped out of the boat not forgetting to take her box of
dresses with her . As soon as she was out of the boat it sailed away . 
 " Now what shall I ever do ? " said Dionysia .  " The ship has gone away and
left me and how shall I ever earn my living ? I have never done
anything useful in all my life . " 

Dionysia surely had to do something to earn her living immediately , so
she at once set out to see what she could find to do . She went from
house to house asking for food and work . At last she came to the royal
palace . Here at the royal palace they told her that they had great
need of a maid to take care of the hens . Dionysia thought that this
was something which she could do , so she accepted the position at
once . It was , of course , very different work from being a princess in
a royal palace but it provided her with food and shelter , and when
Dionysia thought of having to marry the old king she was never sorry
that she had left home . 

Time passed and at last there was a great feast day celebrated in the
city . Everybody in the palace went except the little maid who minded
the hens . After everybody had gone away Dionysia decided that she
would go to the _festa_ too . She combed her hair and put on her gown
which was the colour of the fields and all their flowers . In this
wonderful gown she was sure nobody would ever guess that she was the
little maid who had been left at home to mind the hens . She did want
to go to the _festa_ ! She hurried there as fast as she could and
arrived just in time for the dances . 

Everybody at the _festa_ noticed the beautiful maiden in her gown the
colour of the fields and all their flowers . The prince fell madly in
love with her . Nobody had ever seen her before and nobody could find
out who the beautiful stranger was or where she came from . Before the
_festa_ was over Dionysia slipped away , and , when the rest of the
royal household returned home there was the little maid minding the
hens just as they had left her . 

The second day of the _festa_ everybody went early except the little
maid who looked after the hens . When the others had gone she put on
her dress the colour of the sea and all its fishes and went to the
_festa_ . She attracted even more attention than she had the day
before . 

When the _festa_ was over and the royal household had returned to the
royal palace , the prince remarked to his mother ,  " Don ' t you think that
the beautiful stranger at the _festa_ looks like the little maid who
minds our hens ? " 

 " What nonsense , " replied his mother .  " How could the little maid who
minds our hens ever get such wonderful gowns to wear ? " Just to make
sure , however , the prince told the royal councillor to find out if
the little maid who minds the royal hens had been to the _festa_ . All
the servants told about leaving her at home with the hens and coming
back and finding her just as they had left her . 

 " Whoever the beautiful stranger at the _festa_ may be , " said the
prince ,  " she is the one above all others whom I want for my wife . I
shall find her some way . " 

The third day of the _festa_ Dionysia went attired in her gown the
colour of the sky and all its stars . The prince fell more madly in
love with her than ever . He could not get her to tell him who she was
or where she lived but he gave her a beautiful jewel . 

When the prince returned home he would not eat any food . He grew thin
and pale . Every one around the palace tried his best to invent some
dish which would tempt the prince ' s appetite . 

Finally the little maid who took care of the hens said that she
thought she could prepare a dish which the prince would eat . 

Accordingly she made a dish of broth for the prince and in the bottom
of the dish she dropped the jewel which the prince had given her . 

When the broth was set before the prince he was about to send it away
untouched , just as he did everything else , but the sparkling jewel
attracted his attention . 

 " Who made this dish of broth ? " he asked as soon as he could speak . 

 " It was made by the little maid who minds the hens , " replied his
mother . 

 " Send for the little maid to come to me at once , " cried the prince .  " I
knew that the beautiful stranger at the _festa_ looked like our little
maid who minds the hens . " 

The prince married Dionysia the very next day and Dionysia was the
very happiest girl in all the world , for from the first moment that
she had seen the prince , she had known that he was the one above all
others whom she wished to marry . 

Alas ! In Dionysia ' s excitement she forgot all about calling the name
of her old playmate , Labismena , at the hour of her marriage as she had
promised to do . She thought of nothing but the prince . 

There was no escape for Labismena . She had to remain in the form of a
sea serpent because of Dionysia ' s neglect . She had lost her chance to
come out of the sea and become a lovely princess herself and find a
charming prince of her own . For this reason her sad moan is heard in
the sea until this very day . Perhaps you have noticed it . 

You will often hear the call come from the sea as it breaks against
the shore ,  " Dionysia , Di-o-ny-si-a . " No wonder that the sea moans . It
is enough to make a sea serpent sad to be forgotten by the very person
one has done most to help . 




XVIII

How the Brazilian Beetles Got

Their Gorgeous Coats


In Brazil the beetles have such beautifully coloured , hard-shelled
coats upon their backs that they are often set in pins and necklaces
like precious stones . Once upon a time , years and years ago , they had
ordinary plain brown coats . This is how it happened that the Brazilian
beetle earned a new coat . 

One day a little brown beetle was crawling along a wall when a big
grey rat ran out of a hole in the wall and looked down scornfully at
the little beetle .  " O ho ! " he said to the beetle ,  " how slowly you
crawl along . You ' ll never get anywhere in the world . Just look at me
and see how fast I can run . " 

The big grey rat ran to the end of the wall , wheeled around , and came
back to the place where the little beetle was slowly crawling along at
only a tiny distance from where the rat had left her . 

 " Don ' t you wish that you could run like that ? " said the big grey rat
to the little brown beetle . 

 " You are surely a fast runner , " replied the little brown beetle
politely . Her mother had taught her always to be polite and had often
said to her that a really polite beetle never boasts about her own
accomplishments . The little brown beetle never boasted a single boast
about the things she could do . She just went on slowly crawling along
the wall . 

A bright green and gold parrot in the mango tree over the wall had
heard the conversation .  " How would you like to race with the beetle ? " 
he asked the big grey rat .  " I live next door to the tailor bird , " he
added ,  " and just to make the race exciting I ' ll offer a bright
coloured coat as a prize to the one who wins the race . You may choose
for it any colour you like and I ' ll have it made to order . " 

 " I ' d like a yellow coat with stripes like the tiger ' s , " said the big
grey rat , looking over his shoulder at his gaunt grey sides as if he
were already admiring his new coat . 

 " I ' d like a beautiful , bright coloured new coat , too , " said the little
brown beetle . 

The big grey rat laughed long and loud until his gaunt grey sides were
shaking .  " Why , you talk just as if you thought you had a chance to win
the race , " he said , when he could speak . 

The bright green and gold parrot set the royal palm tree at the top of
the cliff as the goal of the race . He gave the signal to start and
then he flew away to the royal palm tree to watch for the end of the
race . 

The big grey rat ran as fast as he could . Then he thought how very
tired he was getting .  " What ' s the use of hurrying ? " he said to
himself .  " The little brown beetle can not possibly win . If I were
racing with somebody who could really run it would be very different . " 
Then he started to run more slowly but every time his heart beat it
said ,  " Hurry up ! Hurry up ! " The big grey rat decided that it was best
to obey the little voice in his heart so he hurried just as fast as he
could . 

When he reached the royal palm tree at the top of the cliff he could
hardly believe his eyes . He thought he must be having a bad dream . 
There was the little brown beetle sitting quietly beside the bright
green and gold parrot . The big grey rat had never been so surprised in
all his life .  " How did you ever manage to run fast enough to get here
so soon ? " he asked the little brown beetle as soon as he could catch
his breath . 

The little brown beetle drew out the tiny wings from her sides . 
 " Nobody said anything about having to run to win the race , " she
replied ,  " so I flew instead . " 

 " I did not know that you could fly , " said the big grey rat in a
subdued little voice . 

 " After this , " said the bright green and gold parrot ,  " never judge any
one by his looks alone . You never can tell how often or where you may
find concealed wings . You have lost the prize . " 

Until this day , even in Brazil where the flowers and birds and beasts
and insects have such gorgeous colouring , the rat wears a plain dull
grey coat . 

Then the parrot turned to the little brown beetle who was waiting
quietly at his side .  " What colour do you want your new coat to be ? " he
asked . 

The little brown beetle looked up at the bright green and gold parrot , 
at the green and gold palm trees above their heads , at the green
mangoes with golden flushes on their cheeks lying on the ground under
the mango trees , at the golden sunshine upon the distant green hills . 
 " I choose a coat of green and gold , " she said . 

From that day to this the Brazilian beetle has worn a coat of green
with golden lights upon it . 

For years and years the Brazilian beetles were all very proud to wear
green and gold coats like that of the beetle who raced with the rat . 

Then , once upon a time , it happened that there was a little beetle who
grew discontented with her coat of green and gold . She looked up at
the blue sky and out at the blue sea and wished that she had a blue
coat instead . She talked about it so much that finally her mother took
her to the parrot who lived next to the tailor bird . 

 " You may change your coat for a blue one , " said the parrot ,  " but if
you change you ' ll have to give up something . " 

 " Oh , I ' ll gladly give up anything if only I may have a blue coat
instead of a green and gold one , " said the discontented little beetle . 

When she received her new coat she thought it was very beautiful . It
was a lovely shade of blue and it had silvery white lights upon it
like the light of the stars . When she put it on , however , she
discovered that it was not hard like the green and gold one . From that
day to this the blue beetles ' coats have not been hard and firm . That
is the reason why the jewellers have difficulty in using them in pins
and necklaces like other beetles . 

From the moment that the little beetle put on her new blue coat she
never grew again . From that day to this the blue beetles have been
much smaller than the green and gold ones . 

When the Brazilians made their flag they took for it a square of green
the colour of the green beetle ' s coat . Within this square they placed
a diamond of gold like the golden lights which play upon the green
beetle ' s back . Then , within the diamond , they drew a circle to
represent the round earth and they coloured it blue like the coat of
the blue beetle . Upon the blue circle they placed stars of silvery
white like the silvery white lights on the back of the blue beetle . 
About the blue circle of the earth which they thus pictured they drew
a band of white , and upon this band they wrote the motto of their
country ,  " _Ordem e Progresso_ , order and progress . " ﻿Poppypink sat up in bed and yawned .  " Why is everybody getting up so
early ? " she asked .  " Is it a holiday ? " 

The older fairies were dressing themselves and brushing their long fine
hair .  " Wonderwings is coming to see us , " they said .  " Jump up , little
Poppypink . " 

 " Who is Wonderwings ? " she asked . 

 " You will see when you are dressed . Hurry , or you will miss her . " 


 " Oh dear ! I am so sleepy , " said Poppypink , and she yawned again .  " I
don ' t care about Wonderwings . " She snuggled down into the bedclothes
again , and went to sleep . 

Presently she was awakened by the sound of the sweetest singing she had
ever heard , and a flash of brilliant colour went past her window pane of
crystal set in pearl . 

 " That must be Wonderwings , " she said .  " Oh , I must see her . I hope I am
not too late . " 

She sprang from bed and dressed so hurriedly that I am afraid her hair
did not receive its due amount of brushing . Then she ran out into the
garden . 

The older fairies stood all in a group , saying loudly  " I will go , " and
 " I will go . " And before them , scarcely touching the ground with the tip
of her foot , stood poised a glorious fairy , taller than any other there . 
She was altogether beautiful; and her wings--as soon as Poppypink saw
them she knew why the visitor had been called Wonderwings . For they
reached high above her head and almost to the ground , and they glowed
with so many colours that it seemed as if a million jewels had been Hung
upon them and had stuck , growing into a million flashing stars that
made a million little rainbows with every sway and movement of her body . 

 " How lovely ! Oh , how lovely ! " cried Poppypink . She crept nearer to the
beautiful fairy and sat among the daisies at her feet .  " See , " she cried . 
 " My wings are small and colourless . Tell me how I may grow wings like
yours . " Just as little girls adore beautiful hair , so do little fairies
adore beautiful wings . 

Wonderwings smiled down at her .  " Such wings as mine are only to be won
in sadder lands than these , " she said .  " If you would have them you must
leave your fairyland and come where humans live , and where hunger and
sorrow and death trample the city streets . " 

 " I will come ! " cried Poppypink .  " I will come ! " 

 " Come then , " said Wonderwings . She took the little fairy ' s hand , and up
they all rose into the clear air , flying far and far away till they left
their fairyland behind and came at last to the sadder lands where humans
lived . There Wonderwings showed them where hunger and sorrow and death
trampled the city streets , and the band of fairies flew lower and lower
to look . 

 " The children tumble and fight in the dirty lanes , and cry for bread , " 
cried Poppypink .  " The little ones , I cannot bear to hear them sob . " 

 " Perhaps you can help them , " said Wonderwings . 

 " I am only a little fairy . What can I do ? " asked Poppypink .  " I have no
bread to give them . " 

She flew a little lower , to gaze at them more nearly .  " What can I do ? " 
she asked again . 

No answer came . She looked around , and found herself alone . Wonderwings
and the older fairies had in a moment gone from sight . 

Below , a crippled child sat among rags in a dark corner of a dreary
room , and tears ran down her cheeks .  " The sunshine , the pretty yellow
sunshine ! " she wailed .  " If only I could run and play in the pretty
sunshine ! " 

 " Here is something I can do , " thought Poppypink . She gathered armfuls of
the golden sunbeams , and flying with them through the glass as only a
fairy can fly , herself unseen , she heaped them over the twisted hands
and pale thin face of the child , and left her playing with them and
smiling happily . 


Lower she flew to help the little ones who cried about the gutters . She
led the starving and shelterless to comfort , the toddlers to safety; she
brought a flower to the hopeless , ease to sick ones racked with pain; at
night she flew with glittering dreams from room to room , so that even
sad-eyed feeble babies laughed for pleasure in their sleep . Day after
day , night after night she toiled , for weeks and months and years . There
was so much to do ! The time passed like a moment . So busy was she that
she had forgotten all about her wings . 

One day there came a flash of colour in the air beside her , and
Wonderwings and all the older fairies stood around her .  " Dear
Poppypink , " cried one ,  " how your wings have grown ! And how beautiful
they are ! They are so tall that they reach above your head and almost to
the ground , and they glow with so many colours that it seems as if a
million jewels had been flung upon them and had stuck , growing into a
million flashing stars that make a million little rainbows with every
sway and movement of your body . " 

Poppypink laughed with joy .  " I am so glad , so very glad ! " she said .  " I
had forgotten all about my wings . " 

 " Yet they have grown with use , " said Wonderwings;  " and for every deed of
kindness done a star has sprung , to shine in beauty there for evermore . " 




