There was once a wise old king in a far-off land who said to himself ,  " I
have a daughter as well as a son; why should she not have a kingdom too ? 
I will see to it at once . " 

He called the chief map-maker to him , and said:  " Make a map of my
kingdom and divide it by a line so evenly that each part shall be
exactly half . There must not be one hair ' s breadth more on the east of
the line than on the west . " 

The chief map-maker worked hard , and soon had the map ready , and it was
divided so evenly that there was not a hair ' s breadth more on the east
of the line than on the west . Then the king made a law that when he died
the Prince should rule over all the country on one side of the line , and
the Princess should rule over all the country on the other side . The
Prince ' s land he called Eastroyal , and the Princess ' s land he called
Westroyal , and from that day to this there have always been kings over
Eastroyal and queens over Westroyal . 

But it was soon noticed that in Eastroyal the people became discontented
and quarrelsome and poor , and were always finding fault with the
government; whereas in the west country over the border they were so
happy and kindly that they praised each queen from the beginning of her
reign to the end . Nobody knew why there should be so great a difference , 
but a great difference there was . Things grew worse and worse in
Eastroyal , until at last the people rose and turned the reigning king
off his throne and set his little son in his place .  " Perhaps we shall be
better satisfied now ! " they said . 

The new king ' s mother walked alone , deep in thought; and she was very
troubled .  " How can I teach my little son to please his people better
than his father did ? " she wondered .  " It would break my heart if he too
angered them and lost his crown , yet already he is showing a haughty
temper in his treatment of his lords , and I know not what to do . " 

 " I know ! I know ! " said a voice . 

The Queen-mother was much startled; though she had not spoken aloud , the
words seemed an answer to her thought . She looked over the low wall of
the garden into the road . There an old woman hobbled , leaning on a
stick , and muttering to herself . She was poor and ragged , and bent with
age .  " I know , I know ! " she said again . 

 " What do you know ? " asked the Queen-mother gently . 

The old woman looked up at her .  " Go to Westroyal , " she said; and she
hobbled away . 

 " Ah , a witch ! " thought the Queen-mother;  " and she is right . The Queens
of the West have undoubtedly some secret means of making their people
love them . I will find out what it is . " 

She prepared for a visit to Westroyal , and arrived a few days later at
the palace of the reigning queen . Here she was welcomed and feasted and
treated right lovingly , but though she kept her eyes and her ears as
wide open as it was possible for eyes and ears to be , she could not
discover the secret . She grew sad with disappointment . 

The young queen saw that she was sorrowful .  " You are not happy here . 
What is the matter ? " she asked .  " What can I do to make you glad ? " 

The Queen-mother held out her hands imploringly .  " Only give me your
secret , " she begged .  " Tell me how you gain the love of your people and
keep it through all the years . Tell me so that I may teach my young son
how to hold his throne ? " 

 " Is that all ? " exclaimed the Queen .  " Come , I will show you . " 


She led the way to her own lovely sleeping-chamber , hung with rose silk
and panelled with polished silver and amethyst , and she pointed to a
great mirror set strongly into the wall .  " Look within ! " she said . 

Wonderingly , the Queen-mother obeyed . On the surface of the mirror the
faces and forms of herself and the young queen were reflected; but
after a few moments , as she gazed , these faded away , and in their places
came a picture of a mine , with blackened toilers filling tracks with
coal . That , too , faded , and a golden cornfield showed upon the polished
glass; under the hot summer sun the busy reapers moved , wiping the sweat
from their brows when they stopped a moment to rest . A third picture was
of weavers making cloth . A cottage home came next , and a lordly mansion
of the rich , and a homeless child seeking shelter under a city bridge . 
So scene followed scene , beautiful , or sad , or sordid , sometimes wild
and violent , and sometimes gay and peaceful , showing in the main a
people happy and content . 

 " What is it ? " asked the amazed Queen-mother at last .  " How come these
pictures here ? " 

 " They are the life of my state reflected on this magic mirror for my
help , " replied the Queen .  " Long ago , when the first queen came to rule
the new kingdom of Westroyal , the fairies brought this mirror and set it
in the wall as here you see it . Faithfully ever since it has reflected
the daily happenings through-out the land , the people ' s toil and
pleasures , their dangers and their comforts and rewards . So each queen
has known her country . Your son , looking in his mirror , sees but
himself; I see the sufferings of my people and know what things they
need , and so plainly are these pictures set before me that I cannot rest
till I have used my power to give relief . " 

 " Oh ! " cried the Queen-mother ,  " now I see why you are loved . How can I
get such a mirror for my son ? " 

 " That I know not , " replied the Queen . 

Then the Queen-mother returned sad at heart to the kingdom of her son , 
pondering on what she had seen . 

Once again she walked in her garden alone .  " How shall I get such a
mirror ? " she wondered .  " What should I do ? " 

As once before , a voice replied  " I know ! I know ! " 

The Queen-mother looked over the garden wall . Hobbling along the road
was the old woman who had bade her go to Westroyal .  " You who helped me
before , help me again ! " cried the Queen-mother .  " I have obeyed you . How
now shall I get a magic mirror for my son ? " 

The old woman looked up at her .  " Go to the Deeps , " she said , and she
hobbled off . 

Now this was a dreadful command to the Queen-mother , for the Deeps was a
horrible black pool in the roughest and most dangerous part of the
country . It was said to be formed of the country ' s tears and to be also
bottomless , and to be haunted by beings of strange shape . There were
stories of their mysterious power and evil ways . Yet go she must , if
going meant the gaining of a magic mirror for her son . And she must go
alone , for only so could any seeker find the pathway to the pool , so it
was said . 

 " I will go at once , before my courage fails , " she said , and she left her
sheltered garden and set off across the land . 

She had many weary miles to travel , past villages and towns and fields , 
and she was footsore and faint when at last she reached the winding
track that led between the darkening hills . Yet on she went , following
the murmur of a tiny stream that dropped through thick-set bushes into a
shadowed valley . On she went still , and now the darkness came , and she
had lost her way . She stumbled over fallen logs , pushed with bleeding
hands and torn clothes through bramble wildernesses , and found at last
her way again to the narrow track beside the little stream that murmured
in the dark . 

On she went , and down . The stream suddenly widened into a round
blackness open to the sky , but walled in by jagged rocks . It was the
pool . Utterly spent through weariness and fear , she sank down among the
rocks to rest , and waited there for what might come to her . 

Strange rustlings sounded round the rocks , strange forms loomed close
beside her , strange voices asked her:  " What are you ? Why come you to our
haunts ? " Though her heart was sick with dread she answered boldly in a
firm clear voice .  " Give me a magic mirror for my son , that he may learn
to rule . " 

There was a flash , and the pool and all the rocks were lit by a light
brighter and softer than that of moon or stars . All round her stood the
beings who had loomed so strangely in the darkness . They were fairies , 
exquisite in shape and fineness , robed in flowing gossamer of many
colours . They smiled at her , and touched her with their gentle hands , 
and immediately she was well .  " Your love has brought you nobly through
much fear and hurt , " they said .  " You shall have your due reward . Look
into the Deeps . " 


One took her hand and led her to the edge , and the Queen-mother , 
fearless and smiling now , looked down into the fathomless water of the
pool . As she gazed , ripples came upon its surface . They broke away into
shining cascades of diamonds and pearls , and between them appeared the
face and shoulders of the old woman of the road .  " I have your magic
mirror , " she cried .  " It is formed of the lowest teardrops of the Deeps . " 

She sprang out and trod the water to the shore , and as she went her rags
fell from her and she rose into the air a shining queen of fairies , more
beautiful than any other there , holding in her hand a tiny gleaming
mirror .  " Come , " she said ,  " let us set it in its place . " 

She touched the Queen-mother ' s hand , and in a flash they were all at the
palace , within the young king ' s sleeping chamber of turquoise and gold . 
There as he lay asleep the fairies set the mirror in its place with
magic words , and as it touched the wall it lengthened out and widened
till it stood as large as that of the young queen across the border
line . Over the polished glass began to float the pictures of the
country ' s life .  " How can I show my gratitude ? " the Queen-mother asked;
but the fairies were gone . 

Next morning when the little king awoke he ran to see the fine new
mirror in his room . He gazed and gazed upon the strange entrancing
pictures that came on it , and every day he spent long hours at the
mirror . And as he learned to recognise the hardships and the sufferings
of his people his heart grew hot to give relief , and he was no more
haughty , but used his power to ease their woes . So in Eastroyal as in
Westroyal there was content , and the people loved their king and praised
him through all his days until the end . And all the kings who followed
after him ruled wisely and were loved . 




