It was the feast of Pentecost , and King Arthur was holding his court of
the Round Table at the city of Kin-Kenadon , hard by the sea in Wales . 
In the high hall the tables were set for dinner , and the floor was
freshly strewn with rushes , flowers and fennel , so that the place
smelled as sweet as a field . The cook and his scullions came to and fro
through the door of the kitchen with anxious faces , for they feared
lest the meats should be overdone , but as yet King Arthur would not sit
to dinner . For it was his custom never to go to meat on that day until
he had heard or seen some great marvel or adventure . 

Sir Gawaine stood looking from a window in the bower where the king sat
with the queen , and suddenly he turned with a laugh , and said:

'Sir , go to your meat , for here , I think , cometh a strange adventure . '

And even as the king took his seat on the high dais in the hall , and
his knights sat at the Round Table , through the great door of the hall
came two men , well beseen and richly dressed , and , leaning on their
shoulders , was a tall , fair , young man , as goodly to strength and
breadth as ever was seen , with hands large and fair . But he was either
lazy or ill-conditioned , for he leaned upon his fellows as if he were
unable to stand upright . And the three of them marched through the
hall , speaking no word , and they came to the foot of the dais , while
men sat silent and marvelling . Then the young man raised himself
upright , and it was seen that he was a foot and a half taller than
those beside him . 

'God bless you , O king ! ' said the young man , 'and all your fair
fellowship , and in especial the fellowship of the Round Table . I come
to crave of your kindness three gifts , and they are such as ye may
worshipfully and honourably grant unto me . And the first I will ask
now , and the others will I ask at the same day twelvemonths , 
wheresoever ye hold your feast of Pentecost . '

'Ask , ' said the king , 'and ye shall be granted your petition . '

'The first is this , ' said he , 'that ye give me meat and drink and
lodging here for a year . '

'Willingly , ' said the king , 'but what is your name and whence come you ? 
Ye have the bearing of good lineage . '

'That is as may be , ' was the reply , 'but I may tell you naught , if it
please you , lord . '

Then King Arthur called Sir Kay , his steward , and bade him tend the
young man for a year as if he were a lord's son . 

'There is no need that he should have such care , ' sneered Sir Kay , who
was a man of a sour mind . 'I dare swear that he is but a villein born . 
If he were of good blood he would have craved a horse and harness . And
since he hath no name I will dub him Beaumains , or Fair Hands , for see
how soft are his hands ! And he shall live in the kitchen , and become as
fat as any pig ! '

But Sir Lancelot and Sir Gawaine reproached Sir Kay for his mocking of
the young man , 'for , ' said Sir Lancelot , 'I dare lay my head he hath
the making of a man of great worship . '

'That cannot be , ' said Sir Kay; 'he has asked as his nature prompted
him . He will make naught but fat , for he desires only meat and drink . 
On my life I would swear he is only some lazy fellow from an abbey , 
where food hath failed , and so he has come hither for sustenance . '

So Kay sat down to his meat laughing , and Beaumains went to the door of
the hall , where the varlets and boys ate the leavings from the table;
but he fared badly there , for they jeered at him as Sir Kay had done . 

Afterwards Sir Lancelot , of his great gentleness and courtesy , bade him
come to his chamber , to be better fed and clothed; and Sir Gawaine , 
because of a liking he felt in his heart for the young man , proffered
him good meat and drink and a soft bed . But then , and at all other
times , Beaumains refused , and would do nothing but what Sir Kay
commanded . 

Thus he lived in the kitchen , eating broken scraps , and lying at night
where the scullions lay , except that he was given the chilliest spot
furthest from the fire . But he did what he was bidden to do with a
cheerful air and was ever willing to work . And if there was any
jousting of knights or any other sights of prowess , these would he see
with the greatest delight . In any sports or trials of strength or skill
among the serving-men , he was ever foremost , and none could overcome
him in wrestling or at quarterstaff , nor could any throw the bar or
cast the stone so far as he could , no , not by two yards . 

Whenever Sir Kay met him about the hall or the kitchen he would laugh
mockingly , and to those about him he would say , 'Well , how like you my
huge boy of the kitchen ? '

But to such sneers , and to all the scorns and insults of the varlets of
the kitchen , Beaumains would answer naught , and was ever quiet and mild
whatever he endured . And to all was he ever gentle , both man and child , 
and he never put forth his great strength in anger . 

Thus a year passed , until again it was the feast of Pentecost , and at
that time the king held it at his chief city in Wales , Caerleon-upon-Usk . 
And again the feast was royally prepared in the great hall of the
court , but the king would not give the signal to sit to meat until he
should have heard or seen some strange adventure . 

But about noon a squire came to where the king waited , and said , 'Lord , 
I am bidden to say ye may go to your meat , for there cometh a damsel
with some strange adventure . '

Quickly the king sat on the high seat , and the cooks brought in the
smoking collops of meat and the dishes of savoury stews . And as they
began to eat , there came a maiden of a plain sharp visage , who made her
way to the step of the dais , and there kneeling , cried:

'Succour and help I crave of you , O king ! '

'For whom ? ' said the king , 'and for what reason ? '

'Sir , ' said the maiden , 'my lady sister is of great beauty and renown , 
and is besieged in her castle by a tyrant-knight , who will not let her
go forth from her castle; and because it is said that here in your
court are the noblest knights in all the world , I come to you praying
for aid . '

'What is your lady sister's name ? ' asked the king , 'and where doth she
dwell , and tell me who is he that doth besiege her ? '

'Sir king , ' said the lady , 'I may not tell you my sister's name , but
she is of great beauty and of wide lands . And the tyrant-knight who
besieges her is the Red Knight of Reedlands . '

'I know him not , ' replied the king . 

'Sir , ' cried Sir Gawaine from his seat , 'I know him well . He is one of
the perilous knights of the world , for he hath the strength of seven
men , and from him I once escaped barely with my life . '

'Fair lady , ' said the king , 'I would help you willingly , but as ye will
not tell me your lady's name , none of my knights here shall go with you
with my consent . '

The damsel looked about the hall with a quick angry glance , and the
knights that sat there liked not her sour looks . Then from the crowd of
scullions and kitchen lads that hung about the serving-tables at the
side of the hall came Beaumains , his dress smirched , but his handsome
face lit up and his eyes burning with eagerness . 

'Sir king ! ' he cried , holding up his hand , 'a boon I crave ! '

As he came to the step of the dais the damsel shrank from him as if he
had been something foul . 

'Say on , ' replied the king to the young man . 

'God thank you , my king , ' went on Beaumains . 'I have been these twelve
months in your kitchen , and have had my full living , as ye did
graciously order , and now I ask for the two further gifts ye promised . '

'Ye have but to ask , ' replied the king . 

'Sir , they are these , ' said Beaumains . 'First , that you will grant me
this adventure of the damsel . '

'I grant it you , ' said King Arthur . 

'Then , sir , this is the other , --that ye shall bid Sir Lancelot du Lake
to follow me , and to make me a knight when I shall desire him . '

'All this shall be done if Sir Lancelot think it well , ' said the king . 

But the lady was exceedingly wroth , and her eyes flashed with scorn as
she turned to the king:

'Shame on thee ! ' she cried; 'will you give me a kitchen scullion to aid
me ? '

With that she hastened from the hall , mounted her horse and rode away . 
Even as she went forth , a dwarf in the dress of a page entered the hall
leading a great horse richly caparisoned , and on the saddle was piled a
splendid suit of armour . And the dwarf went up to Beaumains and began
to arm him , while men asked each other whence came all this fine gear . 

When he was dressed in armour , all the knights marvelled to see how
goodly a man he looked . Then Beaumains took leave of King Arthur and of
Sir Gawaine , and asked Sir Lancelot to follow him . 

Many people went to the door of the hall to see Beaumains mount his
horse and ride after the damsel , and the way he sat his steed , with its
trappings of gold and purple , excited their admiration . But all
wondered to see that Beaumains had neither shield nor spear , and some
laughed and said , 'The ignorant churl ! Doth he think the mere sight of
him on horseback will affright his enemies , that he carries neither
shield nor lance . '

Sir Kay sneered with them , and suddenly getting up from his seat he
cried:

'By my faith ! I will go after my kitchen boy and see whether he will
still know me for his better ! '

'Ye had better bide at home , ' said Sir Lancelot , and Sir Gawaine
agreed . 

But Sir Kay laughed them aside , and having swiftly put on his armour , 
he took his spear and shield and rode after Beaumains . He caught up
with the youth just as the latter reached the side of the damsel , and
Sir Kay cried out , with a scornful laugh:

'What ! Beaumains , do ye not know me ? '

'Ay , ' replied Beaumains , 'I know ye for the most ungentle knight in all
King Arthur's court , and therefore keep you off from me . '

'Ah , churl ! ' cried Sir Kay , 'thou needst a lesson from me . A beggar , 
though he be on horseback , is still a beggar . '

With that he put his lance in rest and dashed towards Beaumains , 
expecting an easy victory . But the young man , putting the lance aside
with his sword just as it was about to strike him , rushed upon Sir Kay , 
and with a deft thrust struck him through a joint of his armour , so
that Sir Kay fell backwards off his horse to the ground . Swiftly
leaping down , Beaumains took possession of his opponent's spear and
shield , and commanded his dwarf to mount upon Sir Kay's horse . 

Then , after remounting , Beaumains rejoined the damsel , who had seen all
that had taken place , but said nothing . 

At that moment they saw Sir Lancelot coming towards him . He had seen
Sir Kay's discomfiture , and wondered at the mastery which Beaumains had
shown . 

'Fair sir , ' cried Beaumains , turning and drawing rein as Sir Lancelot
approached , 'I would joust with you , if ye will . '

'Have at you , then ! ' replied Sir Lancelot with a laugh , and with spears
in rest they set their horses at a great gallop . They came together so
fiercely that they were both thrust backwards from their saddles and
fell to the earth , half stunned and greatly bruised . 

Sir Lancelot recovered first and ran to help Beaumains to his feet , and
then , with their shields before them , they continued the combat with
swords . For an hour they strove fiercely , thrusting , striking and
parrying like two great boars in a forest clearing . Sir Lancelot was
astonished to feel how great was the young man's strength , how swift
were his thrusts , and how powerful were his blows . He recognised that
Beaumains was a dangerous fighter , and that he himself would have much
to do to overcome him . 

'Beaumains , ' he cried at length , 'fight not so hard , lad . Our quarrel , 
if we have aught , is surely not so great that we cannot leave off . '

'That is truth ! ' said Beaumains , laughing , as he dropped the point of
his weapon . 'But , Sir Lancelot , it doth me good to feel your wondrous
skill and the strength of your arm . Yet , my lord , I have not shown the
uttermost of mine . '

'By my faith , I believe ye , ' cried Sir Lancelot , 'for I should have
much ado to keep myself from shameful defeat if you should really push
me to the utmost . Therefore I say that you need not fear any earthly
knight . '

'I thank you for your good words , ' replied Beaumains . 'And do you think
I may hope at any time to become a proved knight ? '

'Fight as you have fought with me , and I have no doubt of you . '

'Then , I pray you , my lord , ' said Beaumains , 'give me the order of
knighthood . '

'Ere I do that , you must tell me your name and of what kin you were
born , ' replied Sir Lancelot . 

'If you will promise to tell no one , I will reveal it . '

Sir Lancelot gave his promise , and Beaumains , going closer , whispered
some words into Sir Lancelot's ear . 

'Ah , sir , ' said Sir Lancelot , taking the young man's hand in his , 'I am
glad I was not deceived . I knew you must come of great kin , and that
you had not come to King Arthur for meat or drink . Kneel now , and I
will make you knight . '

So Beaumains knelt before Sir Lancelot , who lightly touched him on the
shoulder with his sword , naming him knight . 

Thereupon they parted with many kind words , and Beaumains made haste to
overtake the damsel , who had long since disappeared . 

As for Sir Kay , he was lifted upon Sir Lancelot's shield and taken back
to the court , and there slowly he recovered of his wound . Men laughed
him to scorn for the beating he had received from his own 'kitchen
boy . '

'Lo , ' said some , 'the proud knight went forth to cuff his own scullion , 
and the scullion beat him sore and took his weapons for spoil . '

When Beaumains reached the side of the damsel , she pulled up her horse
and turned upon him with flashing eyes and angry looks . 

'What doest thou here ? ' she cried . 'Away from me--thou smellest of the
kitchen , knave ! Pah ! thy clothes are foul with grease and tallow ! Dost
thou think to ride with me ? '

'Lady , ' said Beaumains , and he spoke full gently , 'my clothes may be
smirched , but my arm , I trust , is as strong to defend you as any that
is wrapped in silk . '

'Out upon thee , saucy churl ! ' she cried . 'Thinkest thou I should allow
for that knight whom you thrust from his horse but now ? Nay , not a whit
do I , for thou didst strike him foully and like a coward ! I know thee
well , for Sir Kay named you . Beaumains you are , dainty of hands and of
eating , like a spoilt page . Get thee gone , thou turner of spits and
washer of greasy dishes ! '

But for all that she raved , Beaumains would not reply in angry words , 
though his heart burned within him . 

'Damsel , ' said he courteously , 'ye may say what ye will to me , but I
will not go from you whatever you say . I have given my promise to King
Arthur that I will achieve this adventure for you , and that will I do
or die in the trial of it . '

The girl laughed mockingly . 

'_You_ will finish my adventure--_you_ will come to our aid ! ' she cried
in scorn . 'Fie on thee , thou upstart kitchen page ! But if you will not
go from me , then come , fool , and I shall see thee quickly shamed . Thou
art proud with the too good living thou hadst in Arthur's kitchen , but
one I know whose face thou wilt not dare to look into , my knight of the
kitchen ! '

So saying , she pushed on her horse , and thus in silence they went on
together . 

In a little while they came to a dark wood , and suddenly as they rode , 
a man with white scared face started from behind a bush and ran to the
side of Beaumains . 

'Go not that way , sir knight , ' he said , 'for there be six knaves who
have taken my lord and bound him , and now they will surely take you and
your lady unless you go back . I barely escaped with my life , and hid
when I heard you , thinking you were of their thievish company . '

'Take me to them ! ' cried Beaumains , and the poor squire , holding the
knight's stirrup-leather , ran with him . And surely , in a little while , 
three knaves rushed forth before them in the green drive and bade
Beaumains stand . But grimly he dashed at them , before ever they could
recover . Two he cut down with his good sword as they stood , and the
third , trying to escape , was run between the shoulders . 

Then turning , Beaumains saw in a glade near the drive where three other
knaves stood beside a knight bound to a tree . They dashed towards
Beaumains with spiked clubs uplifted . But the squire rushed at one , 
tripped him up and despatched him; and the others suddenly decided to
turn and flee . Their resolution came too late , however , for Beaumains
cut them down as they ran . 

The knight was quickly released by his squire , and came up to his
rescuer , and thanked him heartily for his speedy help . 

'Come with me , ' he said , 'you and your lady , to my castle , which is but
a little way hence , and I will fittingly requite thee for the saving of
my life . '

'Nay , ' said Beaumains , 'I will have no reward . All I do henceforth is
but my duty , and I will take naught in payment . Moreover , I must follow
this lady . '

The knight went to the lady , and begged that she would accept his
hospitality , for the twilight was deepening and they were yet far from
a town . The damsel consented , but , on reaching the castle of the
knight , she would not permit Beaumains to sit at the same table with
her . 

'Take the knave hence ! ' she cried haughtily . 'He is but a scullion from
King Arthur's kitchen , and is not fit to sit with a lady of rank . He is
more suited , sir knight , to dine with your turnspits . '

'Lady , I do not understand your words , ' said the knight , 'for this
gentleman hath proved himself a man of knightly courage and courtesy
this day . '

'As for that , ' said the lady , 'I count it naught . He took the rascals
unawares , and they had no heart . They were but sorrier knaves than he
is . '

'Well , ' said the knight , 'since you mislike him so , he shall sit with
me , and you shall sit alone . '

So it was done , and while the lady sat eating her meal in chilly
silence at one table , Beaumains and the knight , his host , laughed and
talked merrily over their dinner at another . 

Next morning , early , Beaumains and the lady were up and away while yet
the dew shone on the leaves . Soon they passed through a great forest
and approached a wide river . In a little while they rode down to where
a roughly paved way ran into the water , and , looking to the other bank , 
Beaumains was aware of two knights on horseback , stationed as if to
hinder his passing the ford . 

'Now , sir kitchen knight , ' laughed the lady mockingly , 'what sayest
thou ? Art thou a match for these two knights , or wilt thou not turn
back ? '

'I would not turn if they were six , ' replied Beaumains quietly . 

With that he rushed , with spear at rest , into the ford , and one of the
waiting knights came swiftly against him . They met in the midst with so
great a shock that their spears were splintered . They then closed
fiercely with their swords , and hurtled about in the foaming , dashing
water , beating at each other . Suddenly Beaumains struck the other so
hard a stroke on his helm that he was stunned , and fell from his horse
into the stream , which whirled him away into the deeps , and there
drowned him . 

Then Beaumains rode swiftly towards the other knight , who with his
lance dashed against him . But Beaumains parried the spear stroke , and
with one great heave of his sword , clove the other's helm in twain , so
that the knight fell like a stone . 

'Alas ! ' cried the lady , as she came across the ford , 'that ever kitchen
knave should have the mishap to slay two such noble knights ! Doubtless
thou thinkest thou hast done mightily , sir knight of the turnspit , but
I saw well how it all happened . The first knight's horse stumbled on
the stones of the ford , and the other thou didst stab from behind . 
'Twas a shameful deed ! '

'Damsel , ' said Beaumains , quiet in words though hot of mind at her
words , 'ye may say what ye will . I only know that I fight fairly , as
God gives me strength . I reck not what ye say , so I win your lady
sister from her oppressor . '

'Thou knave of impudence ! ' cried the lady . 'Thee to speak of winning my
lady sister , high of rank and rich in wide lands as she is ! But thou
shalt soon see knights that shall abate thy pride . '

'Whatever knights they be , I care not , so that I win good words from
you at last , ' said Beaumains . 

'Those thou shalt never have , thou churl , ' replied the lady scornfully . 
'For all that thou hast done has been by chance and misadventure , and
not by the prowess of thy hands . But if thou wilt follow me , why , then , 
come , and I shall the more quickly be rid of thee , for of a surety thou
wilt soon be slain . '

Beaumains answered naught , and so they went on their way . 



Thus they fared until evensong , and then they came to a waste land , 
where their way led through a narrow darkling valley . And at the head
thereof they entered upon a wide land , black and drear to the very
skies , and beside the way was a black hawthorn , and thereon hung a
black banner and a black shield , and by it , stuck upright , was a long
black spear , and beside it was a great black horse covered with silk , 
and a black stone fast by it . 

And upon the stone sat a knight in black armour , at sight of whom the
damsel cried:

'Now , my kitchen knight , 'tis not too late . Fly back through the
valley , or this knight will surely slay thee . '

'Nay , I will not , ' said Beaumains , 'for I fear him not . '

The black knight came to the damsel and asked if she had brought this
knight from King Arthur's court to be her champion . 

'Fie ! ' she said angrily , 'he is no knight . He is but a knave that was
fed for alms in the king's kitchen , and would follow me in spite of all
I say . And I would that you would rid me of him . To-day he slew two
noble knights at the passage of the water , and all by evil chance . '

'A strong knave , in truth , ' answered the knight , 'and a saucy one . Then
this will I do . He shall leave me his horse and armour , for since he is
but a knave , my knightly hands may not harm him . '

'You speak lightly of my horse and armour , ' said Beaumains , 'but I will
have you know that you get naught from me , and moreover I will pass
these lands with this lady in spite of you . '

'Thou knave ! ' cried the knight angrily , 'yield me this lady and thyself
without ado ! '

'Let me see what thou canst do to take us , ' replied Beaumains , and
laughed gaily . 

At this the knight in a rage leaped upon his horse and they thundered
together . The black knight's spear broke , but Beaumains' lance pierced
him through the side and broke off short . Nevertheless , though badly
wounded , the black knight drew his sword and fought manfully , striking
Beaumains many mighty blows and bruising him sorely . 

But suddenly his lifted sword fell from his hand , and turning in his
saddle , he dropped to the ground in a swoon , and shortly died . 

And Beaumains , seeing that the black armour was better than his own , 
armed himself in it with the aid of his dwarf squire , and rode after
the damsel . 

But ever as before she railed at him , telling him he had conquered the
black knight by a cowardly blow; but Beaumains would answer her nothing
in anger . 

Anon they came to the edge of a vast and dark forest , and from its
shadows came a knight in green armour , who cried to the damsel:

'Lady , is that my brother the Black Knight whom ye bring riding behind
ye ? '

'Nay , sir knight , it is not your brother , ' she replied . 'It is but a
kitchen knave who by treachery hath slain your noble brother , the
Knight of the Black Lands . '

'Thou traitor ! ' cried the green knight . 'Now shalt thou surely die , for
my brother , Sir Percard , was a most noble knight and a valiant . And to
think that he fell by the dirty hand of a knave is great shame . '

'I am no knave ! ' said Beaumains , 'but of lineage as high as thine , 
maybe . And I slew your brother in knightly fashion . '

But the green knight stayed not to answer , and they hurtled together , 
and clashed midway as if it were thunder . And Beaumains' stroke was so
mighty that both the green knight and his horse fell to the ground . 

Swiftly the green knight rose to his feet , and then , Beaumains having
alighted , they rushed together with their swords , and stood a long time
hacking , thrusting and parrying . And each hurt the other sorely . 

'Oh , my lord , the green knight , ' cried the damsel , 'why do ye stand so
long fighting with that kitchen knave ? A shame it is to see a proved
knight matched by a dirty scullion ! Slay him for me and be done ! '

Shamed by her words the green knight gave a fierce stroke and clove
Beaumains' shield in twain . Then Beaumains , smarting with this blow , 
and in anger at the words of the lady , suddenly gave the green knight
so great a stroke that he fell upon his knees , and then was thrust
grovelling upon the earth . 

Swiftly Beaumains cut the fastenings of his helm , and , tearing it off , 
lifted his sword to strike off the other's head . 

But the green knight prayed of his mercy and pleaded hard for his life . 

'Thou shalt plead in vain , ' said Beaumains , 'unless this lady shall beg
thy life of me . '

'Shame on thee , thou kitchen knave ! ' cried the lady , biting her lip
with anger . 'Thinkest thou I shall crave aught of thee , and be so
beholden to thee ? '

'Then he shall die ! ' cried Beaumains . 

'O lady , suffer me not to die ! ' cried the prostrate knight , 'when a
fair word from you will save my life . And you , sir knight , give me my
life , and I will yield myself and thirty knights to be your men and do
your commands while they live . '

'Now that is a grievous shame ! ' cried the lady , 'What , Sir Green
Knight , art such a coward as to crave thy life of a scullion knave , and
promise him thirty knights' service ! '

'You and your thirty knights shall avail you naught , ' said Beaumains
grimly , 'and since this lady will not beg thy life of me , why , now I
shall slay thee . '

With that he raised the sword , but the lady cried out:

'Put down , thou rascally knave , and slay him not , or thou shalt repent
it ! '

'Lady , ' said Beaumains , and bowed full gently , 'your command is to me a
pleasure , and at your desire I give him his life . '

Then the green knight did homage to Beaumains and gave up his sword . 
Afterwards he took them to his castle near by , where they passed the
night . 

Next morning the green knight , whose name was Sir Pertolope , 
accompanied them some distance on their way , and at parting he told
Beaumains that he and his thirty knights would do service when and
where he might desire . Thereupon Beaumains told him that he must go and
yield himself and his knights to King Arthur , and this Sir Pertolope
promised faithfully to do . 

And again , when they had gone some way and had reached a little town , a
knight challenged Beaumains , who , having fought with the stranger and
overpowered him , threatened to slay him unless the lady begged for his
life . This she did , after she had said many bitter and evil things , and
Beaumains commanded the knight to go , with threescore knights which
were in his service , and yield himself up to King Arthur . 

Then Beaumains and the lady went on again , and the lady was full of
rage in that she had been compelled a second time to plead with him for
the life of a knight . 

'Thou shalt get thy full wages to-day , sir kitchen knight , ' said she , 
'for in a little while there will meet us the most valiant knight in
the world , after King Arthur . Methinks thou wouldst do the better part
to flee , for the evil luck which thou hast had with the three knights
you have overcome will not avail thee upon this one . '

'Madam , ' said Beaumains , 'ye know that ye are uncourteous so to
reproach me . I have done you great service these three days , but ever
ye call me coward and kitchen knave . Yet those who have come against
me , whom you said would beat me , are now either slain or have yielded
homage to me . '

'The greater shame , ' said the lady , 'that so lowborn a churl as thou
art should have knights yield to thee who should have slain thee . '

Beaumains answered nothing more , but his heart was very heavy at the
thought that , do what he might , he could not win this lady to speak
fairly of him . 

Towards noon , as they rode , they saw the white towers of a fair city , 
and before its gates was a field newly mown , with many tents therein of
divers rich colours . 

'Lo , there is the town of the man that shall cut thy comb , thou proud
varlet ! ' said the lady . 'A brave and proved knight is he , by name Sir
Persaunt of Mynnid . And he hath a following of five hundred knights and
men-at-arms . '

'A goodly lord , indeed , ' replied Beaumains , 'and one I fain would see . '

The lady laughed mockingly . 

'Thou shalt see him too soon to please thee , I doubt not , ' she replied , 
'for he is the lordliest knight that ever whipped a knave . '

'That may well be , ' said Beaumains , 'and the more desire I have to see
him . '

'Thou fool ! ' cried the lady angrily . 'Thou hadst better turn and flee
while there is time . '

'Not a step will I , ' replied he with a laugh . 'For , look you , if he be
so lordly a knight as you say , he will not set his five hundred knights
on me at once . But if he will send but one against me at a time , I will
do my best till my strength goes from me . No man , be he knave or
knight , can do more . '

At his quiet brave words the lady's heart smote her . She repented of
her evil tongue , when she thought how valiant and true this unknown man
had been on her behalf . 

'Sir , ' she said in a gentler voice , 'ye make me marvel . Thou hast
spoken boldly , and , by my faith , thou hast done boldly , and that makes
me wonder of what kin thou art . But as ye are so brave , and have done , 
you and your horse , great travail these three days , I misdoubt that ye
will get hurt if ye go further . Therefore I bid you turn , or ever it be
too late . '

'Nay , I will not , ' said Beaumains . 'It would be a great shame that now , 
when we are but a few miles from your lady sister's oppressor , I should
turn back . '

'But , sir , I counsel ye to do so , ' said the lady . 'For the strength of
Sir Persaunt , even if ye conquer him , is but little compared with the
great strength of the Red Knight who doth oppress my sister . And I am
sure you have little hope of overcoming him . '

'Nevertheless , lady , I will essay to conquer him , ' said Beaumains , 'for
it is but my duty and my desire to rescue your lady sister as I have
resolved . '

'I marvel what manner of man ye be , ' said the lady . 'It must be that ye
come of noble blood , for no woman could have spoken or treated you more
evilly than I have done . Yet ever you have courteously suffered all I
said . '

'Lady , it is but a man's duty to suffer a woman's wayward words , ' said
Beaumains , 'and they have not been without service to me . For the more
ye angered me the more strength of wrath I put into my blows , and so
was enabled to overcome your enemies . And as to what I am and whence I
came , I could have had meat in other places than in King Arthur's
kitchen , but all that I have done was to try my friends . And whether I
be knave or gentleman , I have done you gentleman's service . '

'That is truth , Sir Beaumains , ' said the lady , all soft and penitent
now , 'and I beg of you forgiveness for all my evil words . '

'I forgive ye with all my heart , ' said Sir Beaumains , 'and I tell you , 
lady , that now that you speak kindly to me , it gladdens me greatly , and
I feel that there is no knight living whom I could not strike down for
the sake of yourself and your lady sister . '

By this time Sir Persaunt had seen them , and had sent a squire to ask
Beaumains whether he came in peace or war . 

'If he will not let us pass , ' replied Beaumains , 'it shall be war . '

At that they saw Sir Persaunt array himself in his armour and mount his
horse , and now he came rushing across the field at utmost speed , his
lance in rest . Beaumains also made his horse leap forward swiftly , and
the two knights met with so great a force that both their lances
splintered in many pieces , and their horses fell dead upon the field . 

But the two knights instantly disentangled themselves , and fought on
foot with shield and sword . So furiously did they hurl themselves at
each other that often they fell to the ground . For two hours the duel
raged , till their hauberks were tattered and their shields were hacked , 
while both were sorely bruised and wounded . 

At length Beaumains thrust Sir Persaunt in the side , and the latter's
attack became less eager . Finally Beaumains hit the other so great a
stroke that he fell headlong , and instantly Beaumains leaped astride of
him and unlashed his helm , as if about to slay him . 

Then Sir Persaunt yielded him and pleaded for his life , and the lady , 
who had stood watching the combat , ran forward , placed her hand on Sir
Beaumains' sword arm , and cried:

'Of your mercy , Sir Beaumains , yield him his life for my sake . '

'I do it willingly , ' cried he , helping the knight to rise , 'for he hath
nobly fought and so deserves not to die . '

'Gramercy , ' said Sir Persaunt , 'and now I know thou art the strong
knight who slew my brothers the Black Knight of the Thorn and the Green
Knight of the Wood . And now I will be your man , and five hundred
knights of mine shall do your service as and when you will . '

And that night they supped bounteously in Sir Persaunt's castle , and
the lady besought Beaumains to sit by her at the same table , and all
three made merry company . 

In the morning , after they had heard mass and broken their fast , 
Beaumains and the lady set out again , and Sir Persaunt went with them
to the drawbridge . 

'Fair lady , ' said he , 'where dost thou lead this valiant knight ? '

'Sir , ' said the lady , 'he is going to raise the siege which hath been
set by the tyrant knight of the Reed Lands . '

'Ah , then he goes to Castle Dangerous , and on the most perilous
adventure that any man could take . For they say the Red Knight hath the
strength of seven men . And he doth oppress one of the fairest and
sweetest ladies in the world . I think you are her sister , Dame Linet ? '

'That is my name , ' replied the lady , 'and my sister is Dame Lyones . '

'This Red Knight is the most dangerous knight in the world , ' said Sir
Persaunt to Beaumains , 'and hath besieged that fair lady these two
years . Many times he might have forced her for terror to have married
him , but he keeps the siege in hopes that Sir Lancelot or even King
Arthur would come to rescue the lady . For he hateth all true knights , 
but those two with most bitterness . '

So they parted from Sir Persaunt and rode onwards , and the lady spoke
now full friendly to Beaumains . 

In a little while , when they had passed through a fair forest , they
came upon a plain , and in the distance was a high castle with many
tents about it , and men passing to and fro between them . And as they
rode under some withered trees by the edge of the forest , they saw , 
hanging by their necks from the bare boughs , many goodly knights in
armour , with their shields and swords hung before them . 

At this shameful sight Beaumains checked his horse and asked: 'What
means this ? '

'Fair sir , ' said Linet , 'abate not your cheer at this dreadful sight , 
for ye have need now of all your courage , or else are we all shamed and
destroyed . These dead knights are those who have come against the Red
Knight trying to rescue my sister from his power . But the tyrant knight
hath overcome them , and slain them thus shamefully by hanging . '

'Now Heaven aid me , ' said Beaumains , 'for this is a most shameful and
unknightly custom , and well doth that evil knight deserve death . '

'Nevertheless he is a knight of great prowess and force , though of evil
custom , ' replied the lady , 'and no one hath ever borne him down in
battle . '

With that they came to a sycamore-tree which stood alone in the plain , 
and on it was hung a great horn of elephant bone , with gold work
curiously wrought . 

'Fair sir , ye must blow that horn if ye wish to do battle with the Red
Knight . But , sir , ' went on the lady quickly , and caught at Beaumains'
arm that already had lifted the horn , 'be ye not overbold . It is now
the hour of prime , and it is said that the Red Knight's force
increaseth to the strength of seven men until it is noon . Wait , 
therefore , until noon shall be past , and his strength shall diminish . '

'Nay , nay , ' said Beaumains , 'speak not thus to me . I will assail him
however mighty he be , and either I will beat him or die with honour in
the field . '

Therewith he lifted the horn and blew so great a blast that instantly
knights came in a great press from the tents , and people looked out
from the walls and windows of the castle . 

Then Beaumains saw a tall man come running from a tent , arming himself
as he came . Two barons set his spurs upon his heels and an earl buckled
his helm upon his head . He was all in red armour , from the plume which
waved upon his crest to the cloth which was upon his horse . And his
shield was all of red , with but a black heart in the centre thereof . 

Then he waited for Beaumains in a little hollow before the castle , so
that all that were therein might see the combat . 

'Now , fair sir , ' said Linet , 'it behoves you to have great courage and
heart , for yonder is your deadliest enemy , and at yonder window is my
lady sister , Dame Lyones . '

Beaumains looked to where Linet was pointing , and saw at a window the
loveliest lady he had ever seen . And as he looked she smiled and bowed
to him , and he felt his heart burn with love for her . 

'Truly , ' he said , 'she is the fairest lady I have ever looked upon , and
she shall be my lady . '

'Cease thy looking at that lady , ' called the Red Knight in a harsh and
angry voice . 'She is my lady , and soon shall she see thy foolish body
swinging from the tree for the ravens to pluck , as others hang there
afore thee . '

''Tis for that shameful sight and for the love of this lady that hates
you and your evil custom , that I am resolved to slay you , if God so
wills , ' was the stern reply of Beaumains . 

'A boastful rogue thou art , ' cried the Red Knight , and laughed
scornfully . 'What is thy name , and whence come ye , Sir Black Knight ? 
For surely from your talk you must be one of those prating and soft
fools of the Round Table ? '

'I will not tell thee my name , ' said Beaumains . 'And as yet I am not of
the worshipful company of King Arthur's Round Table . But when I have
slain thee and rid the world of so shameful a knight , then shall I
crave the king to receive me into that high fellowship of noble and
courteous knights . '

'Make thee ready ! ' shouted the Red Knight in a furious voice . 'I will
talk no more with thee . '

With that they withdrew a little from each other , and then , spurring
their horses , and with lances in rest , they hurled themselves towards
each other . With so great a crash did they come together that both
their spears were broken into a hundred pieces , and their breastplates , 
girths and cruppers burst , and the two knights fell to the ground half
stunned with the shock . 

But in a little while they avoided their struggling horses , and leaping
towards each other with their swords , they cut and hacked each the
other so fiercely that great pieces of their shields and armour flew
off . 

Thus they fought till it was past noon , and would not stop , till at
last they both lacked wind , and thus they stood swaying , staggering , 
panting , yet feinting and striking with what strength they had . The Red
Knight was a cunning fighter , and Beaumains learned much from him , 
though it was at the cost of many a gaping wound . 

When it was evensong they rested by mutual accord , and seated on two
molehills near the fighting place , they had their helms taken off by
their pages and their worse wounds bound up . Then Beaumains lifted up
his eyes to the lady at the window , and saw how her looks were tender
with pity for him . 

So heartened was he at the sight that he started up swiftly , and bade
the Red Knight make him ready to do battle once more to the uttermost . 
Then they rushed fiercely at each other , and the fight raged more hotly
than ever . At length , by cunning , the Red Knight suddenly struck
Beaumains' sword from his hand , and before he could recover it , the Red
Knight had with a great buffet thrown him to the ground , and had fallen
upon him to keep him down . 

Then cried the Lady Linet piteously:

'O Sir Beaumains ! Sir Beaumains ! where is your great heart ? My lady
sister beholds you , and she sobs and weeps , for surely she feels the
evil Red Knight hath her almost in his power ! '

At that , so great a rage possessed Beaumains , that with one great
effort he thrust the Red Knight from him , and , leaping up , he seized
his sword again , and so fiercely did he beat upon his enemy that the
Red Knight sank to his knees , and then was thrust grovelling to the
ground . 

Beaumains leaped astride him , and cut the fastenings of his helm . Then
the Red Knight shrieked for mercy . 

'Thou recreant and coward ! ' said Beaumains . 'Did not any of those
knights that thou hast hung cry to thee for mercy ? What pity and what
mercy didst thou give them ? And thou deservest none from me , nor from
any man ! '

With that he slew him at a stroke , and the people in the castle cried
out with joy . 

Their leader being dead , his following of earls , barons and knights
came and did homage to Beaumains , and he commanded that instantly they
should betake themselves to the court of King Arthur and yield them
into his hands . 

Then for ten days the Lady Linet made Beaumains rest him in the Red
Knight's tent , while she tended his many sore wounds . But ever
Beaumains desired to go into the castle to see the lady he loved , but
his hurts forbade him . 

On the eleventh day he would no longer be denied , but having armed
himself , all except his helm , which his page carried , he rode up to the
castle gate . But as he came thither he saw many armed men , who pulled
up the drawbridge before him , so that he should not enter . 

Therewith he saw a knight at a window , who called to him . 

'Fair sir , I am Sir Gringamor , brother to the Lady Lyones , ' said the
knight . 'I will that ye enter not yet . We know that you have proved
yourself a bold and brave fighter , but we know not who you are . 
Therefore , unless you tell me your name and kindred , I may not suffer
my sister to see you . '

'I know naught of thee , sir knight , ' cried Beaumains sternly . 'My
business is with the lady , from whom I think I deserve a little
kindness , for I have bought her deliverance and her love with some of
the best blood in my body . Must I go away then , thinking she cares more
for a name and noble lineage than for brave deeds and devotion ? Tell
me , Sir Gringamor , is this the will of the Lady Lyones ? '

'Ye have but to tell us thy name and of thy lineage , brave man , ' said
Sir Gringamor . 

'Nay , that I will not ! ' said Beaumains , for his heart was hot with
shame and anger . 'If I were but a churl , I should reckon myself a
nobler man than the recreant knight from whom I have rescued you and
your sister . But since he was a knight , it seems ye would reckon him as
of greater honour than the brave churl that slew him for his evil
deeds . '

'Nay , nay , it is not so ! ' came a sweet voice crying in tears , and Sir
Beaumains saw the tender face of the Lady Lyones at the window where
Sir Gringamor had been . 'My brave knight , think not ill of me , for this
is none of my will , for I am mocked and my pleasure denied in my own
castle by this my over-careful brother . I love thee , sir knight , 
whatsoever thou art , for I feel that thou art gentle and brave , and as
good a man as any lady might love . And I beg you go not far from me , 
for I will have my will erelong , and I tell you now that I trust you , 
and I shall be true to you , and unto my death I shall love you and no
other . And whenever I may come to you I will , in spite of this my
brother . '

Saying these words , the lady sobbed as if her heart would break , and
hiding her face in her hands she was led away by her women . 

With that Beaumains' heart smote him , and he was resolved to reveal his
name and lineage for the sake of the dear lady who loved him . But even
as he thought this , he was aware of a party of knights coming towards
him from the plain , and soon he recognised that they were of the
company of King Arthur's Round Table . 

And the foremost knight , who bore his helm in his hand , rode forward to
him , crying:

'O Gareth , Gareth , my brother , how hast thou deceived us all ! '

Then did Sir Beaumains clasp the other's hand right warmly , for this
was his own brother , Sir Gaheris , sent from King Arthur to bring him
home . 

When Sir Gringamor knew of the coming of these knights , quickly he bade
the drawbridge to be lowered , and in a little while the knights were
being welcomed in the hall . 

'Sir Gringamor , ' said Sir Gaheris , 'I find that I come at a lucky
chance for the happiness of my brother . Already the fame of his brave
deeds has reached King Arthur , for the knights he hath overcome have
put themselves in the mercy of the king . '

'Sir Knight of the Round Table , ' said Sir Gringamor , 'tell me who is
this brave knight that will not say his name ? '

'He is Sir Gareth , my brother , the youngest son of the King of Orkney , '
replied Sir Gaheris , 'and fit for the highest lady in the land . He hath
played this trick upon us all , to test us . We did not know him , for he
hath grown up to manhood while we have been long away from home . But
ever he hath had an adventurous and witty mind . '

'Sir , I thank you , ' said Sir Gringamor , and taking Sir Gareth by the
hand he led him into the bower where sat the Lady Lyones , who sprang to
meet Sir Gareth . To her Sir Gringamor told all that he had heard , and
then left Sir Gareth to tell her more of himself . 

And in a little while , at the court of King Arthur , they were married
with great feastings and joustings and with all things to make merry . 
And Linet was wedded at the same time to Sir Gaheris . For though the
Lady Linet was sharp of tongue , she was of great and good heart , and
well beloved of all who knew her well . 


