Now the time drew nigh which had been foretold by Merlin, before he had
been snared by a greater wizardry than his, and buried alive beneath
the great stone in the forest of Broceliande.

He had prophesied that, with the coming of King Arthur, the island of
Britain should grow in strength and fame, and her knights should be
more valiant and more pure in word and deed than the knights of any
other land. But that, in a little while, they would become proud, and
finding that none could withstand them, they would use their strength
evilly.

To the court of King Arthur, as he sat in London, came tidings of how
his barons warred with each other in remoter parts of his dominions,
seizing the strong castles of each other, putting one another to death,
and forsaking the ways of the Holy Church of Christ and turning to the
idolatry of the old British pagans, some of whom still lurked and
performed their evil rites in the desolate and secret places of the
forests and the hills.

The heart of the king was heavy as he sat thinking, and he wondered why
this evil was entering into the hearts of his knights and barons. He
resolved to take good counsel, and therefore commanded his clerk to
come to him and bade him write down all his thoughts.

Then he gave the letter to a trusty knight, named Sir Brewis, and bade
him take it to the Archbishop of Britain, where he sat, an old and
feeble man, in his great cathedral of St. Asaph, far on the verge of
the western sea. He was the king's kinsman, and already known for his
great sanctity as St. David. In a month the knight brought back the
answer, which was in these words:

'The time draws nigh for the trial and testing of Britain. Three good
knights shall come to you, and you must pray that their spirit shall
spread like fire in the hearts of all your knights. You shall have all
my prayers, dear kinsman, and I bid you say to all your knights, "Watch
and Pray."'

A few days later, when the king sat in hall before the great fire, for
it was passing cold and the wintry wind snarled at the windows, the
great door was flung open, and into the hall came three men bearing a
wounded knight in armour upon his shield. When they had set him down,
the knights that were with the king knew him for Sir Kay the seneschal,
and Sir Kay looked sourly about him, and bade those that carried him
take him to his pallet and fetch a leech, and not stand gaping like
fools.

'How now,' said Sir Gawaine, 'who hath tumbled thee, Sir Kay?'

'A fool whose head I will rase from his shoulders when I am hale
again,' snapped Sir Kay, as he was borne away to his bed.

Then into the hall came a troll, and after the troll came a knight
dressed all in white armour, who, going towards the king, knelt at his
feet.

'Sir,' the knight said, 'I would that ye make me a knight.'

'Of what lineage have ye come?' asked the king.

'I am the only son left to my mother,' replied the knight, 'and she is
the widow of Earl Evroc of the Wolds.'

'Ah,' said the king, and frowned, 'was he one of those turbulent lords
of the north that now slay and war as if they were kin to the pagans,
and threaten to bring ruin into my kingdom?'

'Nay, lord,' said the young knight, 'my father hath been dead these
twenty years.'

'Then what is your name? What have ye done to deserve knighthood?'
asked the king, who was angry at the hurt his old friend and
foster-brother Kay had received.

'Sir, I am Perceval who slew the Dragon Knight, and I am not yet made a
knight.'

All those that stood there cried out in joy, and King Arthur raised the
young knight from his knees and kissed him on both cheeks.

'Fair young warrior, I knew ye not,' said the king, 'and I repent me my
churlish speech. We all have heard your great deeds, and much have I
longed to see ye, and many reproaches gave I to Sir Kay, whose churlish
manner thrust you from my hall.'

'Sir,' said Perceval, when he had clasped the hands of the knights, all
of whom were eager to know him, 'I vowed that I would not come to you
until that I had avenged the blow which Sir Kay had given to my good
friend Tod, who is my squire, and good fortune brought Sir Kay to me,
or perhaps it was the will of Heaven. For as I came riding hitherwards
this morning, I saw in the snow where a hawk had torn a thrush, and the
blood lay on the whiteness of the ground. I stopped and gazed upon it,
for I thought of the white life of Christ who gave His blood to save us
all. Then I wondered whether the blood that He had shed upon the cruel
Cross would ever be so pitiful a thing in men's minds that this dear
Britain of ours would be rid of the evil which seems to be creeping
into it, and in place thereof would turn as white as the sheets of snow
that now lay over all the fields and ways. As I thought thus, I sank
deeper and deeper in my thoughts. Suddenly I felt one strike me on the
arm with the flat of his sword. I turned and saw a knight, who asked me
why I gaped like a mooncalf at the torn bird. I told him it was my
pleasure so to do. He asked if it was my pleasure to have to do with
him, but I said I would liefer pursue my thoughts again. Nevertheless,
he would not let me in quiet, and I drew my sword and beat him in my
anger to the ground. When my squire unlaced his helm he knew him for
Sir Kay, and told some passing men to bear him unto the court.

'So have I punished him both for the insult to my friend and squire and
to myself.'

Men marvelled at the quiet speech and gentle looks and manners of one
whose fame for great deeds was in all men's mouths; and Sir Gawaine
said:

'Of a truth, young chieftain, it had served Sir Kay rightly if ye had
slain him, and he should thank thee for sparing him.'

The other knights agreed that Sir Kay had done most unknightly in thus
picking a quarrel with one who had not offended, and he had merited
defeat.

Thereupon King Arthur knighted Perceval, and they made him great cheer
and welcome; and the king knew in his heart that this was one of the
three good knights whom St. David had spoken of, and he wondered who
were the other two.

It chanced that seven nights before, the good Sir Bors had fared forth
from the court of Arthur to seek knightly adventures. And his spirit
was joyful as he rode, for he felt that some great adventure was to
come to him, howbeit he knew not why he felt this was to be.

Northward he fared through the land, and the snow had not yet fallen,
but so mild was the season that men's thoughts had stirred towards
spring. For many days he journeyed and the ways were more lonely, the
country more desolate, the rocky hills more bare. He wondered why it
was that the land seemed so forsaken, as if the folk had long since
left the fields to become solitary wastes.

At length it befell that one evening he could find no place wherein to
shelter for the night; there was no hermit's cell nor castle nor
knight's hold through all the way by which he had come that day.
Towards twilight he came upon a wide moor, and the cold moon peered at
him over the distant mountains. Far in the midst of the waste he saw a
great pile, as of a castle, and pricked his horse towards it.

It was indeed a castle, but its walls were broken and mossy, as if long
years had passed since it housed fire and gay company. He rode over the
drawbridge into the great courtyard, and the echo of his horse's
hoofbeats was the only sound that greeted him.

He sought the upper chambers, and found in one a rough bed of fern
leaves, and, having supped from the scrip he carried with him, he
composed himself to sleep, glad that at least a roof and thick walls
shielded him from the freezing cold which now swept over the land.

Forthwith he slept; but at midnight he awoke and found it was deeply
dark, and looking to the arrow slit in the wall he sought some friendly
star. As he looked, a great red light burst through, and with that
there came, thrusting fiercely, a great spear like a long flame, which
darted at him, and then stayed just before him. The point of it burned
blue and dazzling.

As he lay marvelling, the spear went back a space; then he grasped his
sword that lay beside him, but before he could defend himself the
flaming spear dashed forward again and smote him in the shoulder.

Then the spear went back and the chamber was deep dark again, and for
very pain Sir Bors lay and groaned. Nor could he sleep more that night.
When it was dawn he arose, thinking to ride forth, but when he went
down into the courtyard to saddle his horse in the stable, he marvelled
to see that where there had been an open ruined gateway the night
before, was now a great black oaken door, spiked and bolted.

For a long time he essayed by every means to get himself out of that
castle, but he could not find a way. Yet never did he hear or see aught
that showed that any one lived there. Many times he went throughout the
place, but never found aught but ruin and emptiness, and the dust and
darkness of long neglect everywhere.

When three days had gone, Sir Bors was faint with the pain of his wound
and the hunger with which he suffered. Then, as he sat beside his horse
in its stall, he suddenly heard the clank of armour, and going forth
into the courtyard saw a knight all armed, with his shield on his
shoulder and his sword naked in his hand.

Without a word the stranger darted at him, and hardly did Sir Bors have
time to dress his shield; and then they lashed mightily at each other,
and thrust and hewed sorely. Thus for half the day they fought, and so
fiercely that soon Sir Bors had many wounds, so that blood oozed from
the joints of his armour. But the other knight seemed to be unharmed,
and never seemed to breathe heavily. Then Sir Bors became extremely
wroth, and beat so fiercely upon the other that he pressed him always
backward until the stranger was nigh to the door of a chamber which
opened into the courtyard; and suddenly he dashed backwards into the
chamber and shut the door.

Nor would he come forth, for all that Sir Bors called him coward and
recreant. Nor would he answer one word, nor had he said one word since
Sir Bors had seen him.

After some time Sir Bors resolved to go back and rest himself beside
his horse, for his great wounds burned him sorely; but as he turned,
suddenly, without a sound, the stranger knight dashed forth, and struck
a felon blow at the good knight's neck. But Sir Bors was aware of him
in time and defended himself full well.

So fiercely did Sir Bors lay on, that soon the other was beaten to his
knees, and then the good knight rushed at him to hurl him headlong and
to slay him. Suddenly the other knight seemed to fall together as if
dead; but the armour sounded hollow as it fell, and Sir Bors marvelled.

Swiftly he hacked the fastenings of the helm and tore it from the neck
armour. Then a great fear seized and shook him. The armour was empty!

He knew then that he had fought with a demon. He crossed himself and
prayed, and weak with deadly fear and his wounds, he went into the
stall and sat beside his horse, and marvelled how he could win with
life from the fell power that seemed to hold him prisoner.

Suddenly, from a dark cavernous hole in the dungeons, came a great
boar, with curving tusks keen as sword-blades, and rushed at Sir Bors
full fiercely. Hardily did the knight defend himself from the strength
and the fierce rushes of the great beast. The boar with its long tusks
tore the shield from the grasp of Sir Bors, and slashed his shield arm
sorely, and then Sir Bors was wroth, and with a very fierce blow he
smote off the boar's head. Immediately thereupon, with the pain of his
many wounds and the weakness of his famine, Sir Bors fainted, and lay
upon the frozen snow as one dead. For long he stayed thus ere he
revived, and then he rose and dragged himself into the stall where lay
his horse, half dead with hunger, before an empty manger.

All that night Sir Bors lay in a sad pass, for he thought that now he
would never see dawn again in life. He prayed and commended his soul to
God, and confessed his sins and prepared himself for death as behoved a
good knight; and thereafter he slept sweetly.

At the dawn he awoke, exceeding hungry, and looking forth into the
court he had it in his mind to carve meat from the dead boar. But he
was astounded beyond measure to find that it was not there. In its
place was a great trencher of steaming hot collops of meat, and toasted
bread, with hot milk in great plenty.

Sir Bors ran towards the food, and so ravenous was his hunger that he
would have devoured it instantly. But he bethought him before he had
placed any of it to his lips, and dropping it he crossed himself and
ran back into the stall and tried not to look forth. He knew that the
food was placed there by some fell fiend or demon to tempt him, and if
he ate of that unholy food, his soul would be for ever lost.

Anon sweet voices sounded in the courtyard as if to attract him forth,
and the smell of the hot food was wafted strongly into the stable. The
fiends themselves could not enter, for there was a horse-shoe hung in
the proper way upon the lintel of the door, and, moreover, Sir Bors had
stuck his sword-point in the ground, and the holy sign of the cross
prevented the evil things from crossing the threshold.

All that day did Sir Bors lie half dying, while the fiends tempted him,
but the knight was too strong and manful of soul to yield, and would
liefer die than become the slave of the powers of the Netherworld.

Then in the twilight he commended his soul to God, for he felt near to
death. When he had finished his prayer, he heard great and horrible
cries in the court as of rage and disappointment. Then came an old man
at the door of the stable, white of hair and very reverend; and he came
and put his hand upon Sir Bors' head and spoke mildly and said:

'Good and faithful knight, sorely tried have ye been, and now you shall
have no more adventures here. Full worshipfully have ye done and better
shall ye do hereafter. And now your wounds shall be healed and ye shall
have good cheer until to-morrow.'

Therewith there was all manner of sweetness and savour in the place,
and Sir Bors saw as in a mist a shining vessel borne by a wondrous
maiden. He knew that this was the Holy Graal; and he bowed his head,
and forthwith he was whole of his wounds.

On the morrow he departed after a night's sweet sleep, and rode to
Arthur's court and told of his adventures.

The king and queen and all the fellowship of the Round Table were
passing glad to see Sir Bors whole and well, and they made much of him,
for they felt that he would do things of great renown.

Then at the feast of Pentecost went all the court to the minster to
hear their service; and when they returned to the palace the king
ordered that dinner should be prepared in the hall of the Round Table,
for this was one of the days when he was wont to assemble all his
knights at a great feast of knighthood.

While they waited for the horn to sound, warning them that the meal was
ready, one came running to the king, saying that a thing of marvel had
happened. And Arthur went to the hall of the Round Table with his
knights, and there in the seats about the great circular board they
found letters of gold written, which said, 'Here should sit Sir
Bedevere,' or 'Here should sit Sir Gawaine,' and thus was the name of a
knight written in every seat.

In the Siege, or Seat, Perilous, where twice or thrice a reckless
knight had dared to sit, but only to be struck dead by a sudden
flashing blow of mystery, there were written the words, 'In the four
hundredth and fourth and fiftieth year after the passion of our Lord,
shall he that shall fill this seat come among ye.'

All the knights marvelled and looked each at the other.

'It seemeth me,' said Lancelot, 'that this is the very day on which
this seat shall be filled by him for whom it is appointed, for this is
the four hundred and fifty-fourth winter since Christ died on the
rood.'

It was seen that on each side of the Siege Perilous was written, on the
right one, the name of Sir Perceval, and on the left one, the name of
Sir Bors.

Then the horn was sounded to dinner, and each knight took the seat
appointed for him, and young knights served them. All the sieges round
the table were filled except the Siege Perilous.

Men ate and drank soberly, for they felt that an adventure strange and
marvellous should happen that day, and so indeed it befell.

For when they had eaten, and the priest was saying in a great silence
the grace after meat, suddenly a shrill wind sounded without, and all
the doors and windows shut fast. Men looked at each other in the
twilight thus caused, and many a face was white with fear.

Then the door opened and an old and reverend man entered, white of
beard and head, and clothed also in white; and Sir Bors knew him for
the same who had come to him at the Castle of Fiends. By the right hand
the ancient man brought a young knight, clad in red armour, with a
sword at his side, but with no shield.

'Peace be with you, fair lords,' said the old man. Then turning to the
king he said:

'Sir, I bring here a young knight, the which is of king's lineage,
whereby the marvels of this court shall be accomplished, and the trial
of this thy kingdom shall be brought to a happy end, if that may be.
And the name of him is Galahad.'

'Sir,' said the king, 'ye be right welcome and the young knight with
you.'

The old man made the young knight unarm him, and he was in a coat of
red sendal, and bare a mantle that was furred with ermine. Then was the
young man led by the reverend man to the Siege Perilous, and sat him
thereon, and men marvelled to see that the death-stroke did not flash
like lightning and slay him.

'Sir,' said the old man to him, 'wit ye well that that is your seat.
For you are he that shall surely achieve the Holy Graal, and such of
these your fellows as are pure in heart and humble shall achieve it
with you.'

'Sir,' said the king, 'if it may be that ye know, will ye tell us what
my knights must do to achieve the Holy Vessel, and thus bring peace
into my kingdom in place of war? For many of those that are kings and
barons under me are warring with each other, and threaten to rend this
island of Britain, and some are forsaking Christ and are turning to the
evil faith and cruel worship of the pagan gods of Britain. And it goeth
to my heart to know this, and I have much dread.'

'Sir king,' said the old white man, 'none may tell you what shall be
the end of this quest of the Holy Graal, but I can tell you and these
your knights what they must do to save this land from the ruin which
doth threaten it. Ye know that the Holy Vessel was that wherein Christ
ate the lamb on the Thursday before he was hung upon the Cross. And
Joseph of Arimathea did bring it here to Britain, and here hath it been
for more than four hundred and fifty winters. And while ye and your
kingdom did love Christ and did do His word, the Sangreal stayed within
your borders. But now ye war with each other, and are evil livers and
full of pride and mastery, and if ye do not repent and stay your
dishonour, then shall the Holy Vessel pass from Britain, and ruin and
death and civil war shall stalk through the land and leave it
desolate.'

Having spoken thus, the old man went from the hall, and none stayed
him; for too many there were who knew that they had been the evil
livers at whom his words had pointed.

Then uprose Sir Gawaine, who was a faithful knight and true man to his
king, though a proud one and a hasty. He was filled with sorrow for the
ruin that threatened his fair land.

'Now I do here avow,' he said, 'that to-morrow, without fail, I shall
set forth, and I shall labour with all the strength of my body and my
soul to go in quest of the Holy Graal, so that if I be fit to see it
and to bring it hither, this dear land may be saved from woe.'

So hot were his words that many of the better knights rose also, and
raising their right hands did make a like avowal; and those that cared
not for the quest felt that they must seem to do as the others did, and
so made avowal also, though in their hearts they thought more of pride
and earthly power.

'Gawaine, Gawaine,' cried the king, and the great tears stood in his
eyes, 'I know ye do right to avow this and to cause these others to
avow also; but a great dread is upon me, for I have great doubt that
this my fellowship shall never meet again.'

'Fear not,' said Lancelot, 'for bethink ye, my lord, in no better
adventure can we find death than in this quest, and of death we are all
sure.'

On the morrow the knights armed themselves, and bade farewell to King
Arthur and his queen, and there was much weeping and great sorrow. And
as the knights rode through the streets of Camelot the crowds stood and
wept, both rich and poor. All were full of dread to see so many brave
knights depart that never more would return.

Having passed through the gates of the town, every knight took the way
that he liked best.

Now Sir Galahad was without a shield, and he rode four days without
adventure. At evensong on the fourth day he came to an abbey of white
monks, and there was given great cheer. He found two other knights of
the Round Table at that abbey, the one King Bagdemagus and the other
Sir Ulfin; and the three had supper together, and made great cheer one
of the other, and spoke of the adventures each would desire to have.

'There is within this abbey, as men tell me, a shield,' said King
Bagdemagus, 'which no man may bear about his neck, but he is injured or
slain within three days. Yet to-morrow I will adventure to win it.'

In the morning, therefore, after they had heard mass, King Bagdemagus
asked the abbot to show him where was the shield. Then was he led to
the high altar in the church, and behind it was hung a shield which
glowed with shining whiteness, and in the middle thereof was a red
cross which seemed to quiver as if it were living.

'Sir,' said the abbot, 'this shield ought not to hang about any
knight's neck unless he be one of the three best knights of the world,
and I counsel you to beware.'

'No matter,' said King Bagdemagus, 'I will essay it, for though I am
not Sir Lancelot, yet I am a good knight enough.'

This he said in his pride, and took the shield and put the strap about
his neck, and bade good-bye to the other twain, and so went forth with
his squire.

They had not ridden but two miles or more, when at the opening to a
wood Sir Bagdemagus saw a knight in white armour on a horse, riding up
and down as if to do battle with any that should venture to go into the
forest drive.

When the white knight saw him he called out:

'Who art thou? Thou bearest the shield of a knight peerless, but not
the armour.'

'Who am I?' replied King Bagdemagus scornfully. 'I am he that shall
give a good account of myself with thee.'

With that he levelled his lance and ran furiously upon the knight. But
the other stood still, and when the spear-head was nigh his shield, he
lightly turned it aside, and as Sir Bagdemagus swept by, the knight,
with a quick fierce stroke of his sword, smote him so hard that the
blade bit through the mail even to the shoulder-bone; whereby Sir
Bagdemagus fell to the ground in a swoon.

The white knight called the squire to him and said:

'Bear ye this shield to the young knight, Sir Galahad, who is at the
white abbey. Greet him from me, and say that it is for him to wear this
shield, and none other. And tell him that I shall meet him erelong, if
God wills, and that we shall fare together to that which is appointed
for us.'

The squire did as he was bidden, and told Sir Galahad of the white
knight's words. Sir Galahad asked him what was the device upon the
shield of the white knight, and he answered, 'A red heart.' Then said
the young knight, 'It shall be even as he saith.'

Sir Galahad mounted his horse and rode alone, ever northward, for he
knew that the Holy Graal was hidden in a castle somewhere in the north
among the warring barons. Many days he rode without adventure, until on
a day he came to an old and venerable wood, dark and thick and close,
where the moss hung like thick beards from the hoary branches.

There, in a laund or glade in the midmost part of the forest, he found
an old and white dame, kneeling before a green cross beside the path,
weeping piteously as she prayed and beat her breast.

'What ails ye, lady?' asked Sir Galahad.

'Ah, good knight,' said the old dame, and as she rose it was well seen
she was of gentle birth, I weep for that I have lived to see the day
when sons of mine shall slay each the other. I have three sons, and all
are of the worshipful company of the Round Table. But two are wasteful
livers, and have taken from me all that whereby I lived; and ever hath
my youngest boy, Sir Hewlin, withstood their evil ways. Wherefore they
hated him. And yesterday did Sir Nulloth and Sir Dew, my elder sons,
return, and did quarrel with my dear lad Hewlin. And now I fear they go
about to slay him. Oh, if that they kill him, who is the prop and
comfort of my old age, I shall surely die.'

'Sad it is, lady,' said Sir Galahad, and mournful was his mind, 'to
think that in this dear land of Britain there should be knights that
are given to such thoughts of evil as to slay their own kin. Lead me to
them, I pray ye.'

He set the dame upon his saddle before him, and she led the way through
the forest. When they had gone but a mile she started, and stopped the
horse, and then they heard the sound of clashing steel. Sadly did that
poor lady shriek and cry:

'Ah! they slay him now! My dear son! My dear boy!'

Swiftly Sir Galahad made his horse to leap forward, and in a little
while they came upon a great meadow, where two knights on foot were
together fighting another single knight with swords. Forthwith Sir
Galahad cried with a loud and a stern voice, 'Hold, put up your swords,
ye evil brothers, that would slay each other!'

All turned at the cry. Then, seeing his mother, the young knight Sir
Hewlin threw down his sword. And leaping from Sir Galahad's horse the
reverend lady tottered to her youngest son and threw herself upon his
breast, and he clasped his mother in his arms.

But the two evil brothers laughed scornfully at Sir Galahad.

'Who art thou, thou knight in red?' they cried. 'Thinkest thou to
frighten us with thy big words?'

Quickly they mounted their horses and ran upon Sir Galahad together.
But the lance of one he received upon his shield, and the weapon
snapped in twain; and that of the other he thrust aside and, as the
knight thundered by, he brought down his sword, with so fierce and
wrathful a stroke, that the head of the knight flew from his shoulders.

Seeing this, the other, who was Sir Nulloth, made haste to throw
himself from his horse, and came and kneeled before Sir Galahad,
praying mercy.

'I know who ye are,' he said. 'You are Sir Galahad, the stainless
knight, who shall prevail in all thy deeds, and whom no weapon may
wound until ye have fulfilled your high destiny. And I will do
faithfully any behest ye may lay upon me.'

'I will then,' said Sir Galahad sternly, 'that thou makest peace with
thy mother and thy brother here instantly; that thou seekest naught of
them till thy dying day, which shall not be far from thee; and that
thou goest this day and place thyself in the service of Sir Bedevere,
or Sir Uriens upon the coasts, and help to thrust forth the hateful
pagan from the land.'

The knight swore to do all this, and after he had made his peace with
his kindred, he set forth to do Sir Galahad's bidding. And it was as
the stainless knight had foretold, for in seven days Sir Nulloth had
found death, bravely fighting the pagan pirates.

Sir Galahad went forward, sore of heart to think that such evil was in
the land and in men's minds, that any could be found to wish the death
of a brother and to care naught for the sorrow of an old mother.

Thus for many months Sir Galahad rode about the land, seeking out the
knights who, with their bands of soldiers, fought to wrest from each
other land and castles. And ever he strove to make peace between them,
and to show them how, while they fought with each other, Christian
against Christian, the pagan hordes were let unhindered into the land,
ravening, burning, and slaying.

Some of the battling knights did forsake their evil ways, and went to
Sir Bedevere and Sir Uriens, with whom they strove to push back the
fierce pagans into their long black ships. But many others, so lost to
honour and knightliness were they, performed not their promises, and
continued to fight each with the other.

So fierce, indeed, was the fighting through all that land, that the
peasants forsook the fields and hid themselves; and the pagans from the
northern wilderness came over the walls and wandered, killing and
burning and robbing. And thus in many parts the crops were not sown or
reaped, the wheat stood unharvested and wild, and the grass and weeds
grew tall on the very hearths of the poor peasants and husbandmen.

The heart of Sir Galahad grew sick, seeing the evil which was come into
the land, and he feared that soon the Holy Graal would be taken from
the island of Britain, and that then ruin would stalk throughout the
length and breadth of the realm.

Once, at the dawning, Sir Galahad looked from the door of a little
hermitage where he had passed the night, and was aware of a great
company of men coming over the moor. They were all horsed, and were
going towards the sea, which was on the right hand, where steep and
fearful cliffs fell sheer to the thundering surf beneath. And in their
midst he saw they held captive a full noble knight, who seemed wounded,
and whose armour was all broken and cracked, as if he had fought
valiantly before he had been overcome. Him they were going to hurl
headlong down the cliffs.

Sir Galahad began to arm himself full hastily to meet them. But as he
dressed his armour he was aware of a knight coming swiftly from a
little wood that lay towards the sea-edge. Then was the heart of Sir
Galahad exceeding joyful when he saw that the knight was all in white
armour, and that on his shield was the device of a heart; for he knew
that this was Sir Perceval.

Sir Perceval spurred towards the band of knights, and in a loud voice
called on them to release their captive.

'Who art thou?' they cried.

'I am a knight of the Pendragon of these islands, King Arthur,'
answered Perceval, 'and thy captive is my friend, Sir Bors of
Brittany.'

'Ha! ha!' the others laughed, and spurred furiously towards him. 'Slay
him!' they shouted. 'We own no Arthur here. We are our own lords.'

With spears in rest, seven of the knights thundered against Sir
Perceval. But by this time Sir Galahad was upon his horse, and, making
no outcry, he spurred upon the others.

Three knights he dashed to the ground with one lance-thrust; but then
the spear broke. Therewith he drew his sword, and smote in the thick of
them so furiously on the left and on the right that they could not
abide him, but fled from about Sir Bors, who, wresting a sword from one
of them, rode after the seven that were fighting Sir Perceval.

So valiantly and hardily did the three knights lay about them that in a
little while their enemies had fled, leaving more than half their
number slain.

Then did the three knights make great cheer and welcome of each other,
and told each their adventures, and promised that now they were
together they would never more part till death should summon them.

So, together, they fared thereafter many months, doing noble deeds, and
seeking earnestly to bring men's hearts to turn to friendship and
union, so that, united, the lords of the northern lands should turn
upon the pagans and destroy them utterly.

It befell that, on a morn, they came to a castle on a great cliff that
was in the marches of Scotland; and they heard a horn sound in that
castle and much shouting. On the walls thereof were men of a savage
aspect, peering and looking down at them. And those men had fair hair,
with steel helms which had great horns or wings upon them. On their
tall bodies were leather jerkins, with gold chains and many ornaments.

Then Sir Galahad and his friends were aware that on the topmost
pinnacle of the castle was a banner, floating and flapping in the
morning wind. Black was that banner, and in the midmost part thereof
was a golden raven, with beaks open as if it croaked, and its wings
were wide thrown, as if it flew over a field of slain men.

They knew that this was a horde of pagans who had wrested this castle
from its rightful lord, and that full fierce would be the battle.

Then from a hole or cave beneath a tree near by came a maiden, richly
dressed, but sad and pitiable of face and thin of form, as if from long
pining.

'Fair lords,' said she, 'for God His love turn again if ye may, or else
here ye will come unto your death.'

'Nay,' said Sir Galahad, 'we will not turn again, for He shall help us
in whose service we be entered in. Who are ye, fair damsel, in such
painful guise?'

'Fair lords, I am Issyllt,' said the maiden, and the tears filled her
eyes. 'My father is Earl Hernox, the lord of this castle. And whether
he be dead by torture at the hands of his hateful enemies and these
fiends, or whether he be still alive against a time when they have more
leisure to torture him, I know not. But three nights ago came certain
knights with a horde of these evil pagans, and stormed this castle, and
for all my dear father's valiant deeds, and the prowess of my three
dear brothers, they overcame our people, and my three brothers I saw
slain before my eyes. When they rushed upon my father, my nurse dragged
me away, and we fled hither. But I cannot go away, not knowing whether
my father is dead. And if he be dead I care not whether the pagan
fiends catch and slay me.'

'Fair maiden,' said Sir Galahad, 'be of good heart, for your father may
yet be delivered unto you.'

'Ha, fair lord, I know not how that may be,' said the maiden. Then,
glancing at the castle, she saw the portcullis yawn, and some ten
knights rush forth, with pagans besides on foot. Whereat she clasped
her hands in terror.

'Now God be with ye, fair lords,' she cried. 'You have my prayers, and
may Heaven grant ye victory. But dread is on me for your deaths, brave
knights.'

Full wrathful were the three good knights to hear the girl's sad tale,
and hard was their rage to hear that Christian knights had leagued
themselves with the heathen Saxons so as to get their aid in a private
quarrel with the Earl Hernox. Therefore, very joyously did Galahad and
Perceval leap forward, lances in rest, against the traitorous knights
that rushed towards them from the castle.

Marvellous indeed was it to see the deeds of those three stainless
knights that day; for when their lances were broken, they drew their
swords, and their wrath, their fierceness and their valour, none could
withstand.

While Sir Bors smote with deadly blows the pagans that swarmed about
him, Sir Galahad and Sir Perceval dealt death among the traitorous
knights, so that not one was left alive. And seeing this, the
fair-haired fierce pagans lost heart. Turning, they wished to flee into
the castle and pull down the portcullis.

But swiftly on their heels dashed the three brave knights, and the
pagans, never stopping, heard the hoofs of their horses thunder over
the drawbridge close behind them. The horde of Saxons took flight into
the hall, and there they stood and got breath. But the knights, leaping
from their horses, rushed in on foot, and back to back they met the
onslaught of the yelling heathens.

Very fierce was the anger in the hearts of the three knights, so that
they stayed not their hands even when the pirates gave way and fled
from the dreadful place of slaughter. But the knights pursued them
wheresoever they tried to hide, and hither and thither about the castle
they ran, and in and out the chambers, up and down the stairs, until
for very weariness they had perforce to cease.

Then when they beheld the great multitude of pagans they had slain,
they were sobered and sad, thinking themselves great sinners.

'Certes,' said Sir Bors, 'I ween that God willed that we should slay so
many, for they must have done great evil.'

'They are indeed foul pagans,' said Sir Galahad, 'and have done great
wrong and cruelty in their time to women and little children through
this fair land of Britain. But I doubt we have been mad this little
while to slay so many mothers' sons as these.'

Then from out a secret chamber came a priest, white with great age, and
with a countenance that shone marvellously bright; and when he saw how
many were slain in that hall, he was abashed. Sir Galahad put off his
helm, and the two knights with him, and all three kneeled down and
confessed the madness of their sin which had slain even those that
craved for quarter.

'Ye have done more than ye wist, brave knights,' said the priest, when
he had absolved them; 'for the evil knights that led these pagan
thieves had plotted to gain this castle because of the great and holy
treasures that are hidden here. And by a prophecy I know that ye are
the three good knights, peerless among all, who should achieve this
deed. Therefore, when ye have ordered these slain to be removed, and
when the hall shall be garnished and your harness shall be cleaned of
the signs of battle, ye shall see that which hath been ordained for
ye.'

When all had been done as they had commanded, and the place well
cleansed and fresh rushes laid along the floor, the three knights sat
on a bench, and the Earl Hernox and the maid Issyllt with them, and
there was much cheer and rejoicing between them all.

Then the old priest called the earl and his daughter from the room, and
left the three knights together. Suddenly, as they sat talking, the
doors were shut and the windows were darkened, and a great wind arose
with a sad sound, wailing and piping. Then the darkness suddenly went
away, and they saw a great light shining in the midmost part of the
hall, so bright and strong that hardly could their eyes suffer it. Soon
through the light they could see a table of silver, whereon was a wide
dish also of silver, marvellously and delicately wrought.

Then the doors opened and they saw angels entering; and two bare
candles of wax, and the third held a towel, and in the hand of the
fourth was a spear which bled marvellously from the point thereof.
Going to the table the angels set the candles and the towel upon it,
and the spear was placed beside the shining vessel.

Of a sudden the knights were aware that there sat one beside the table
who was marvellously old and white; and he was dressed in the habit of
a bishop, and his face was very winning, and a great brightness flowed
from it.

On the breast of his robe were words in the Latin tongue, which said,
'Lo, I am Joseph, the first bishop of Christendom, who did take our
Lord's body down from the cruel rood.'

The three marvelled greatly, for that bishop had been dead more than
four hundred years. Seeing their looks of perplexity, the bishop smiled
sweetly upon them, and said:

'Marvel not, O knights, for though I am now a spirit, I know thy
weakness, and have come to aid thee.'

Then the bishop took up the shining vessel from the table, and came to
Galahad; and the knight kneeled down and took of the food that was
within the holy dish. And after that the other two received it. Of
marvellous savour was the food, and like none that they had ever eaten
or thought of at any time before.

Then the bishop said to Galahad:

'Son, knowest thou what is this vessel I hold in my hands?'

'Nay, holy man, I know not,' replied Galahad.

'It is the holy vessel which men call the Sangreal, out of which our
Lord ate the lamb at the feast before He was betrayed to that death
upon the rood whereby He redeemed the world, if men would but choose
His gentle law.'

'It is what we have most desired to see, holy father,' said Sir
Galahad.

'And it is what, alas, no others in this realm shall ever see,' said
the bishop; and his countenance, which before had been sweet and
gentle, now saddened and was dark. 'For this night it shall depart from
this land of Logris, so that it shall never more be seen here.

'Alas,' cried Galahad and Perceval, 'that is great sorrow to hear. O
holy bishop and spirit, say not that it means that this land shall be
rent in ruin and given up to heathendom again?'

'It must be so,' said the bishop sadly. 'Christ is not served in
gentleness, nor is His law worshipped in this land, where men slay
their brothers, rob their kindred, and make treaties with the pagans.
And its knights are turned to evil livers, desiring mastery and proud
power. Therefore hath Christ sent me to disinherit this land of this
holy thing with which He hath honoured it since that time when I
brought it here four hundred and fifty-five winters ago.'

Hearing these words of doom, Sir Galahad and Sir Perceval wept full
piteously for the fate of their country. When they had mourned greatly,
they asked if there was no hope of turning the land from its evil ways.

'There is none,' said the bishop sorrowfully. 'Have ye three not tried
manfully these last two years since ye have sought that which ye now
see? And all thy labours, thy battling, thy griefs, have they availed
aught? No, it is the will of God that in due time this land and this
people shall be put into the melting-pot. And when the season appointed
shall come, sorrow and death, rebellion and treachery shall stalk
through the land, and naught shall stand of its present kingdoms; the
pagans shall blot out the holy memory of God and Christ, and shall turn
the fanes of prayer into the lairs of wolves, and owls shall rest where
hymns of praise have been sung. And no wars of goodly knights may
hinder these things of dreadful doom. But I have this message for ye
two, Galahad and Perceval; that inasmuch as ye have seen this which you
craved to see, and have lived purely and unspotted from pride or evil,
thy souls shall go with me when I shall depart. But you, my son,' he
said, looking at Sir Bors, 'still find in your heart the love of kin,
and a longing for battle, and so you shall remain, to fight for Christ
while yet you are alive.'

Suddenly a fierce light came where they sat, so that Sir Bors kneeled
as one blinded for a time. When it had passed, he looked and saw where
Sir Galahad and Sir Perceval still kneeled, with their hands lifted as
if in prayer. But there was naught to see of the holy vessel or the
spear, nor was Joseph there.

Then, going to the two knights, he found that they were dead.

Sir Bors knew then that their souls had gone with Joseph and the holy
vessel, and had been borne to the heaven for which their pure and
humble hearts had yearned while yet they lived.

Then Sir Bors made great sorrow for his two fellows, and knew that
never more would he be as joyful or as careless as he had been. With
right heavy mood he craved of Earl Hernox to have a grave dug deep in
the living rock whereon the castle was builded. This the earl gladly
did, and very solemnly the two good knights were buried, and long did
Sir Bors mourn over the grave.

In a little while thereafter Sir Bors armed himself, and departed, and
after many adventures, rode southwards till he came to Camelot. And
there he told the king and such knights as there were, how the two
stainless knights had achieved the Holy Graal, and how their souls had
been taken up with the sacred vessel.

All the court mourned for the two knights, and the king commanded a
history to be written of what Sir Bors had told. It was so done, and
the book richly adorned with many coloured letters, was kept in the
great treasure-chest in the castle of Sarum.

Ever after Sir Bors was a silent man, for he could not forget the holy
and terrible sight he had seen. Of the doom which was coming in due
time upon the dear and fair land of Britain, as was prophesied by St.
Joseph, he told no man, but kept the words fast locked in his heart.




XI

OF THE PLOTS OF SIR MORDRED; AND HOW SIR LANCELOT SAVED THE QUEEN


After the quest of the Sangreal was completed, and all the knights that
were left alive had returned to the court of King Arthur, there was
great joy among the people, and the king and Queen Gwenevere were
passing glad of the remnant that had come home again.

Especially did the queen make much of Sir Lancelot and of Sir Bors his
cousin, for they were the two most noble and courteous knights of the
Round Table, and none thought of them but as men peerless and beyond
compare.

Sir Mordred, who was the king's nephew, was jealous of the two knights,
and went about privily among such knights as were his familiars, and
spoke sneering words concerning Sir Lancelot and the queen and Sir
Bors. Once Sir Mordred said such words in the hearing of his brother
Sir Gawaine; but that knight so heavily and wrathfully took him to
task, that Sir Mordred knew that Sir Gawaine envied not the two
knights, and could never be brought to think other than friendly
thoughts of them.

Therefore Sir Mordred hated the two knights more than ever. Of a slight
frame was Mordred, but tall, with dark hair, sallow face, and deep-set
grey eyes beside a thin long nose. Few loved him, for he was never
cheery nor very friendly, and ever seemed to sneer with his thin lips
and his cold wolfish eyes.

In a little while strange dark rumours began to go about the court, and
it was whispered that so proud had Sir Lancelot become of his fame and
prowess, that he harboured evil thoughts against the king, and that he
aimed to make a kingdom for himself out of the countries that lay about
his own lands of Joyous Gard in the northern marches.

Then fresh rumours went about, and these were the most evil of all. It
was said that he sought to slay the king, and wished to make Gwenevere
his own queen, and with her he would rule over all Britain.

First, men laughed and passed the rumours with a shrug and a gesture of
scorn; but when they were repeated again and again, some began half to
believe them. Many said that there must be some truth therein, for Sir
Lancelot was ever wending his way to the north country, and fought
there many battles and overcame many knights.

But others said this was because many ladies and damsels, who had lost
lands and homes and been evilly oppressed by the warring barons in
those parts, had heard of his great fame for knightly deeds and noble
manners, and came beseeching him to be their champion against those who
had robbed them.

Others said that it was but natural that when he was at the court he
should speak much to the queen, for he had from the first vowed himself
to be her knight, and many deeds of daring and prowess had he done for
her.

Yet others there were who believed that what rumour said might be true;
and others, who were good and noble knights, sorrowed to think that
such evil thoughts should be spread about by some treacherous tongues.

When men came to ask who had set these evil tongues to wag, it was
always found that a certain mean knight, named Sir Pinel, had first
spoken wrong of Lancelot and Sir Bors and the queen. And men noticed
that it was not long before the queen began to look coldly at Sir
Pinel, and then they knew that his rumours had reached her ears.

'What profit doth Sir Pinel think to gain from those false tales of
her?' said Sir Brastias one day, as he and Sir Gareth came from the
hawking together. 'For none ever reckoned him as a knight of any merit,
and all good men will now think less of him.'

'I fear me,' said Sir Gareth, 'that there is more beneath it all than
we wot of. Sir Pinel is a bosom friend of Sir Mordred's. Often have I
seen their heads together in places apart. And though he is my brother,
Sir Mordred is one I cannot love.'

'What fear you, Gareth?' asked Sir Brastias.

'I fear naught that he may do,' said Gareth, 'but I think he hates Sir
Lancelot and he hates Gawaine also, the chief of our party, because he
hath roundly told Mordred that he is a traitor, and that he will not be
drawn from his firm friendship with Sir Lancelot and his kinsmen. I
think Sir Mordred would do much to cause some ill to Gawaine or Sir
Lancelot, so long as his own evil body was not hurt.'

'Sad it is,' said Brastias full gloomily, 'to think a man of such great
kin should harbour hatred and murder against the chief of his kin. And
that such should be, methinks, betokens that evil is about to fall upon
our famous brotherhood of the Round Table, and on this dear land of
Britain.'

Now it befell that the poor queen had heard, through her maidens, of
the rumours concerning herself and Sir Lancelot, and, taking counsel of
no one, she bethought how she could prove to the remnant of the Round
Table that she was free of any plots against the king or the fair
kingdom of Britain.

She resolved that she would invite the knights to a privy dinner, and
when they had eaten she would throw herself upon their knightly pity
and honour, telling them how the evil rumours wronged and hurt her
bitterly. And she doubted not that thus their manly sympathy and
worship of her, their queen, would, by her words, cast out the evil
effects of the slanderous tales.

Therefore, at that dinner, she had Sir Gawaine and his brethren, that
is to say, Sir Gareth, Sir Agravaine, Sir Gaheris and Sir Mordred. Also
there were the kin of Sir Lancelot, to wit, Sir Bors, Sir Blamore, Sir
Bleobaris, Sir Ector de Maris, and Sir Lionel. But Sir Lancelot had
gone into the Scottish marches, to do battle with a notable robber and
oppressor there. There were other knights, making in all the number of
twenty-four. And these were all the remnant of the one hundred and
fifty that had gone forth in the Quest of the Sangreal.

Among the guests were Sir Pinel and his cousin, Sir Mador.

Now Sir Gawaine had a custom of eating apples which he used daily at
dinner and at supper. He loved all manner of fruit, and in especial a
certain brown or russet apple, which was called Afal Coch. Every one
knew of this fondness of Sir Gawaine's, and whoever dined or feasted
him took care to provide such apples for his pleasure.

The queen had known this, and among the fruit for the table she had
ordered such apples to be placed.

Now Sir Mordred, as Sir Gareth had suspected, hated Sir Gawaine with a
deep hatred, and therefore he had, by crafty dealing, taken all the
russet apples from the dish except one, and into this he had thrust a
deadly poison. He guessed that, as every one knew of Sir Gawaine's
fondness for that sort of fruit, no one would take it, but would leave
it for Sir Gawaine, who would eat it and die thereof.

When the feast was near an end, and men laughed and jested together,
the dish of fruit was handed round, and Sir Pinel, the mean knight,
noticed that there was but one of the apples which Sir Gawaine loved;
and to spite that knight, whom he hated, he took that apple, ere the
dish went to Sir Gawaine.

Sir Mordred saw him take it, yet would not cry out to warn his
fellow-traitor, for this would have revealed himself. He saw Sir
Pinel's teeth sink into the brown apple, and Sir Pinel's sneering look
as he glanced across at Sir Gawaine, who was searching vainly in the
dish for his favourite fruit.

Then Sir Mordred saw Sir Pinel's face go red, and then deadly white.
And as the poison gripped him, Sir Pinel rose shrieking from the table,
crying out that some enemy had poisoned him.

Then he sank writhing to the ground, shrieking and moaning, clutching
at the ground and at the legs of the chairs. Suddenly, with a great
groan, he lay still and was dead.

Every knight leaped from the table, ashamed, full of rage and fear,
nigh out of their wits, but dumb. They looked at each other and then at
the dead Sir Pinel, and all their eyes kept from the face of the queen,
where she sat on the high seat, with two of her ladies beside her.

The reason they could not speak was that they knew the queen had heard
of the evil tales which Sir Pinel had spread about her, and that she
must have hated him bitterly. And she had made this feast, and had
invited him thereto, and now he was dead at the board, by means of
deadly poison placed in the food which she had set before him.

Then for very shame some began to leave the chamber; and others could
not bear to look upon the queen, who sat with a face that went now
pale, now red. She had seen what happened, and who it was had been
slain, and she had read the suspicion in men's gestures.

Then the voice of Sir Mador rang out, and checked men from going from
the room, and drew all eyes to where he stood, a tall and burly man,
red and angry of face, and fierce of eyes.

'Look!' he cried, and held between his fingers and high above his head
the apple which Sir Pinel had bitten, 'this is the thing whereof my
kinsman, Sir Pinel, hath lost his life. The matter shall not end here,
for I have lost a noble knight of my blood, and I will be revenged to
the uttermost.'

Then, turning, he savagely looked at the queen, and with fierce rolling
eyes he roared out:

'Thou art the murderess! Thou--the queen! Hear me, knights and
chieftains. I charge the queen with the murder of my kinsman, Sir
Pinel, and justice upon her will I have.'

Every one in the hall stood still as if they were of stone. None could
gainsay him, none could utter a word on behalf of the queen, for all
had suspicion that she had slain Sir Pinel for his slanders of her.

Then suddenly the queen rose, white and trembling.

'My lords and knights, I did not cause it!' she cried in a broken
voice. 'I am innocent! I know not how it came!'

And therewith she fell down in a swoon.

Sir Mordred's pale face smiled with a bitter sneer. He knew not then
whether what had happened would help his evil plots or no; but he
resolved to say naught, and so went out with all the other silent
knights, whilst the ladies of the queen took her up lamenting, and bore
her to her chamber.

With the noise and the sorrow that was in the court, King Arthur came
and craved to know what was the matter; but none of the silent knights
would speak until he met Sir Gawaine, who replied, and said:

'Sir, the queen did invite us to a privy feast with her. And one of the
knights did eat of the fruit on the table, and he is dead by poison.
Therefore, I dread lest the queen will be shamed for this.'

King Arthur was passing heavy at the hearing of these words, and went
unto the queen to comfort her.

On the next day, when the king sat in hall with his two court judges,
as was his wont daily, to hear any causes or charges which might be
brought before him, all men stood with gloomy faces, and there was no
laughing and jesting talk, as was usual at this time.

Sir Mador came forward and charged the queen of murder, and required
that justice should be done upon her.

The king heard him with a sad face and in silence. Then he said:

'Fair lords and noble knights, heavy is my grief for this, and rather
would I give my life for my queen at this moment than that my tongue
should frame so evil a charge against my dear wife and your noble
queen. But I am here to see that law is done, as justly to the highest
as to the lowest. I doubt not that God will soon clear her of this
seeming evil.'

'I know not how that may be,' said Sir Mador angrily, 'for the evil
deed is clear to any man's eyes.'

'I deem this deed was never done by my queen, nor by her desire,' said
the king sternly, 'but by some traitor that would do her evil and
wishes to see her die. But as I am her judge, I may not be her champion
and fight against you for her fair fame. I doubt not, however, that
some good knight will take this charge upon himself, and put his body
in jeopardy for my queen. For if this be not done, dost thou know what
is the penalty?'

'She must be burnt,' said Mador sullenly. 'But she hath done the deed
and will merit the doom.'

'Cease, hasty man,' said King Arthur sternly; 'it goeth to my heart to
hear ye pronounce the doom thou wouldst visit upon that fair lady. Fear
not, Sir Mador, she shall find some good knight to do combat for her.
Therefore do thou name thy day of battle.'

'But hark ye, lord,' said Sir Mador, 'there is none of the
four-and-twenty knights that were bidden to this dinner that hath not
suspicion of the queen for this deed. Therefore, no knight can take
this charge upon him in her behalf. What say ye, my lords?'

He turned to the silent, moody men about the dais.

The knights looked troubled, and were dumb for some moments; but at the
last Sir Gawaine said:

'We cannot excuse the queen, for she gave the feast. And either the
poison came by her will or by her servants.'

But most of the knights were silent, and Sir Bors and his kindred were
very sorrowful. King Arthur was heavy at the words of Sir Gawaine.

'Now, king,' cried Sir Mador triumphantly, 'I require ye, as ye be a
righteous king, give me a day that I may have justice.'

'That will I do,' said the king, 'as I must do, that am a just king. I
give you this day fifteen days, that ye be ready armed on horseback in
the meadow beside the wall at London; and if it so fall out that there
be a knight to encounter with you, then God speed the right; and if
there be no knight to take arms for my queen, then must she suffer by
fire.'

So sorrowful were the king's words that many knights had much ado to
keep from weeping.

'And meanwhile,' said Sir Mador, 'I do require that ye keep the queen
in close ward and prison, lest any try a rescue, and thus defeat the
justice that is my due.'

Though it went to the king's heart to have to order this, he gave the
queen into the keeping of Sir Kay, who kept her in her chamber, guarded
by three knights, to the great grief of her women and all the court.

Then the queen sent for Sir Bors, and when he was come she threw
herself on her knees full piteously before him, and wept sorely, and
begged that he would save her from this dreadful death.

'For by my confession unto Heaven,' she cried, 'I know naught of this
wicked deed how it was brought about. And will ye not take this combat
upon ye for my sake? For I am sure if your kinsman, Sir Lancelot, was
here, he would not suffer this evil suspicion to lie against me. For he
hath ever been my most faithful knight, but now am I without friend in
this great pass.'

'Madam,' replied Sir Bors, 'what can I do? For if I take this charge
upon me for your sake, men will say I was your aider in this crime that
they charge upon you. And I see not how I may fight for you except by
endangering my own life without saving yours. But I tell ye, madam,
what I will do. I will hasten with all speed to the north, trusting in
God to get news of Sir Lancelot, so that I may tell him and bring him
here within the time appointed.'

'Ah, good Sir Bors,' cried the queen, and clasped his hands. 'Do ye do
that, for I know that Sir Lancelot will never believe me guilty of so
great a crime. And I will pray hourly that ye find him and bring him to
me in time, so that my poor body be not unjustly given to the dreadful
flames.'

Forthwith Sir Bors armed himself, and with two squires set forth
instantly; and sent his men in different ways, so that among the three
they should not fail to hear where, in the northern marches, a knight
so famous as Sir Lancelot might be found.

No rest did the good Sir Bors give to himself, but swiftly did he ride
hither and thither questioning all knights whom he met, and inquiring
of every hermitage and abbey and at every harbourage. Finally, when
eleven days had passed of the fifteen, he found Sir Lancelot lying
wounded at a broken abbey, from which, in a fierce fight, he had but
two days before thrust out a band of pagans, who would have murdered
the nuns and robbed the church of its holy relics.

Full wroth was Sir Lancelot when, having lovingly greeted each other,
Sir Bors told him all that had passed with the queen.

'The foul traitors!' he cried, and, getting fiercely from the pallet on
which he lay, he strode up and down the chamber clenching his hands and
gnashing his teeth. 'Do any dare to suspect her--do any think in cold
blood to see that peerless lady bound to the stake, the flames
devouring her noble person? That men should think such things, and move
not a hand in noble wrath, shows how evil are the days in which we
live!'

Then he rushed from the room, wounded as he was; and, full of a cold
wrath, he ordered his arms to be brought and his horse to be saddled.
And to the gentle persuasions of the nuns he said he must be gone, 'for
he must stay a wrong that, if suffered, would sink the kingdom in
unquenchable shame and ruin.'

Then with Sir Bors he rode southwards, full fiercely, and never resting
to eat, but taking food as he rode. At night he would not doff his
armour, but slept beside his horse; and seldom spoke, but was consumed
as by a great fire of anger.

And on the fourteenth day they rode into London.

'Go beg the queen to see me,' he said to Sir Bors.

Sir Bors went, and Sir Lancelot strode unto an hostelry to wash from
himself the stains of travel, and to don a fitting robe in which to
appear before the queen.

Now it had befallen, while Sir Bors had been absent from the court
seeking for Sir Lancelot, that Sir Mordred and Sir Agravaine had made a
plot with each other against him and against Sir Lancelot. And they
caused it to be noised in all the court that Sir Bors had gone to seek
Sir Lancelot, and that Sir Bors was privy to the plots which Sir
Lancelot and the queen had made to wrest the kingdom from King Arthur
and to reign together in his stead. They said that Sir Bors had gone to
warn Sir Lancelot that the time was ripe to strike.

Wherefore many knights were greatly displeased to hear this news, but
some would not believe it, and said that Sir Bors had gone to tell Sir
Lancelot of the jeopardy in which the queen's life was placed, and to
ask him to do battle for her.

'But,' said some, 'if he do not find Sir Lancelot, it is his intention
to do combat for the queen himself, and that is great wrong in Sir
Bors, for he was with us at the feast, and none but she could have
caused that poison.'

Daily the party which inclined to Sir Mordred and Sir Agravaine gained
power, and some were for going to tell the king of the evil designs
which Sir Lancelot and Sir Bors and the queen had against his person
and the kingdom. But Sir Mordred said, 'No, the time is not yet ripe.
Wait a while.'

The guard that was set about the queen's chamber was doubled, and all
were knights that were well-willers to the plots of Sir Mordred and Sir
Agravaine.

When, therefore, Sir Bors came and asked to see the queen, they let him
go to her; but Sir Agravaine hid himself and listened to all that
passed between Sir Bors and the queen. Then he went and told the others
that Sir Lancelot was waiting to speak to the queen, and he counselled
that they should let him come, and then when he came forth again, as he
would be unarmed, they could fall upon him and capture him, and take
him before the king and charge him with his treason and his plots.

And with the consent of Sir Mordred this was so agreed; and he advised
that most of them should hide from before the door, so that Sir
Lancelot should not think the guard was strong.

'For,' said Sir Mordred, 'if he sees there is no great watch kept, he
may strive to free the queen, and when we take him it will be blacker
against him.'

When, therefore, Sir Bors came forth from his audience with the queen,
he found but one knight at the door, and that was Sir Petipace of
Winchelsea, a young man. Sir Bors wondered why the guard of ten or
twelve that had been there before was now gone, and he was uneasy in
his mind.

Going to Sir Lancelot, he told him that the queen would see him at
once; 'but,' added Sir Bors, 'ye shall not go this night by my counsel,
nor should you go before there are more of our kinsmen near us to aid
us in case of need.'

'Why?' said Sir Lancelot.

'Sir,' said Sir Bors, 'I misdoubt me of Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred.
There was a great watch before the door of the queen's room when I
entered; but when I came hence there was but one. And I mistrust them
that stood there. For all were of Sir Mordred's evil company, and
peradventure they lay some snare for you, and I dread me sore of
treachery.'

'Have ye no doubt,' said Sir Lancelot, 'for I shall go and come again
and make no tarrying.'

'Sir,' replied his cousin, 'that me sore repenteth. But if you will, I
will go and seek some of our kinsmen to meet us near by. And do you not
go until I have found them.'

'Nay, I will not stay,' said Sir Lancelot, 'and I marvel me much why ye
say this, for they dare do naught against me.'

'God speed you well,' said Sir Bors, 'if that is your will, and send
you safe and sound again.'

Sir Lancelot departed, taking his sword underneath his arm, while Sir
Bors went forth to find some of their kin. He learned, however, that
many of them had gone forth with the king to punish a bandit lord in
the forest of the Weald, and would not return before the morrow, when
the combat should be held for the queen.

Sir Lancelot came to the door of the queen's prison, and found Sir
Petipace there, and demanded to be let in to see the queen.

'We thought you were in the north, Sir Lancelot,' said the young
knight, with a laugh, 'and surely it will pleasure our lady queen to
see you.'

He unlocked the door of the queen's antechamber, and told her
waiting-woman that Sir Lancelot would see the queen, and in a few
moments Sir Lancelot was let in. The sorrowing queen told him all that
had happened, and how, and he was wroth to think that any one should
suspect her of so great a crime. He promised that on the day appointed
he would fight for her with all his strength, as a true knight should,
and God would defend the right.

Suddenly, as they spoke together, there came loud voices crying outside
the chamber door:

'Traitor knight, Sir Lancelot du Lake, now art thou taken in thy
treachery!'

Sir Lancelot knew that the voices were those of Sir Agravaine, who had
ever been envious of him, and of Sir Mordred, whom no one loved. He
went quickly to the door and barred it with the beam, and bade the
terrified queen not to be alarmed. He asked her whether there was any
armour in the room, which he could put on to defend himself.

'I have none,' she said, weeping sorely, 'wherefore I dread me sore
that evil will come to you, my true and valiant knight, for I hear by
their noise there be many strong knights, wherefore ye are like to be
slain soon, and then shall I surely burn.'

'Alas!' said Sir Lancelot, 'in all my life was I never in such a pass,
to be slain for lack of my armour.'

'Traitor knight,' cried those that were hammering at the door with the
handles of their swords, 'come out at once and skulk there no more, for
know ye well thou art so beset that thou shalt not escape.'

Sir Lancelot went to the queen and, kneeling to her, took her hand and
kissed it, saying:

'Madam, I beseech you to pray for my soul if I be slain. I have been
your true knight with all my power up to this time, and now I will not
fail you if I may; but if I be slain, I am assured that my kinsman Sir
Bors and all the others of my kin will not suffer you to go to the
fire.'

Then Sir Lancelot, leaving the weeping queen, wrapped his mantle round
his left arm as if it were a shield, and prepared to sell his life
dearly. By this time the knights outside had got a bench from the hall,
and using it as a battering-ram, were dashing it against the door to
beat it in.

'Leave your noise, fair lords,' rang out the voice of Lancelot, 'and I
will open the door to ye, and then ye may do to me what ye will.'

'Do it then,' they cried, 'and we will give you your life until we take
thee to King Arthur, to be judged for your treason.'

Sir Lancelot unbarred the door and held it open a little way, so that
one knight only might enter at a time. One entered, a big slow man,
named Sir Colgreve, and swiftly Sir Lancelot slammed the door and
fastened it, to keep the others out.

Sir Colgreve turned and struck at Sir Lancelot; but the latter put the
stroke lightly aside with his sword, and gave so swift and keen a blow
upon the other's helm that Sir Colgreve fell down dead.

Then, while the others hammered and yelled outside the door, Sir
Lancelot swiftly took off the armour of the dead knight, and with the
help of the queen and her waiting-women was armed in it.

Again the knights outside had begun to dash at the door to beat it
down. Sir Lancelot, when he was armed, strode to it and cried out:

'Let be your noise, and go away, for ye shall not prison me this night.
And I promise ye, by my knighthood, that I will appear to-morrow before
the king, and then such of ye as dare may accuse me of treason, and I
will then prove that I am a true man and no traitor.'

'Fie on thee, false traitor,' cried Sir Agravaine and Sir Mordred, 'but
we will have thee this night and slay thee.'

'Then, sirs,' replied Sir Lancelot, 'if ye will not take my counsel,
look well to yourselves.'

With that Sir Lancelot threw the door open suddenly, and while the
others struggled and tripped over the bench between them he had run two
of them through.

Then in that narrow antechamber there was as fierce a fight as ever
brave knight might wish to see. Sir Mordred from behind urged on the
others with evil words, telling them to slay Sir Lancelot; while he
launched at that knight all manner of foul names.

Fiercely did Sir Lancelot fight, for he was full of rage; and as in the
narrow place in which he stood, no more than two could come at him at
once, he could not be overwhelmed by their numbers. There were ten of
them, and so full of force were his blows and so skilful his thrusts,
that in a little while seven lay slain, two were badly wounded, and the
last, who was Sir Mordred, barely escaped with his life, and bore a
deep wound with him.

Sir Lancelot, sorely wounded, returned to the queen, and said:

'Madam, I know not what is this treason with which they charge me; but
I doubt not it will go ill with me, for I have killed many of the kin
of the king and of Sir Gawaine this night. And I misdoubt me that the
king himself will be my foe also. Nevertheless, I will save you, if it
is in my power, from the danger that threatens you.'

'Go ye, Sir Lancelot,' the queen besought him, 'ere the men-at-arms
come, which are so many ye may never hope to escape them. I dread me
sorely that much ill will come of this, and of the evil plots which our
enemies weave about us.'

Then, kneeling, Sir Lancelot kissed the queen's hand, and went from the
prison; and the people who had assembled outside at the noise of the
fighting wondered to see only one knight issue forth, his armour dented
and broken, and dabbled here and there with the blood of his wounds.

Sir Lancelot took his way to the lodging of Sir Bors, who showed his
great gladness to see him again. And when he had been unarmed and his
wounds stanched and bound, Sir Lancelot told him what had befallen him.

'And now I beseech you,' said Sir Lancelot, 'be of good heart, in
whatever great need we stand, for now I fear war must come of it all.
But what is the treason they would charge me with I know not; yet I
dread it meaneth much evil plotting against me and the peace of this
fair kingdom.'

'Sir,' said Sir Bors, 'your enemies and those that envy your great fame
have spread many evil reports about you. They say that you plot to slay
the king and to take Queen Gwenevere to wife, to reign over this
kingdom with you.'

With that Sir Lancelot was so astounded that for some moments he could
not speak. Then he said:

'By my confession unto Heaven, this is as foul a plot against me as
ever fiend could fashion. And it showeth how far they will go to pull
me down and dishonour me. And doth the king know of these evil
rumours?'

'I know not,' replied Sir Bors, 'but I doubt not that Sir Mordred will
not rest his horse till he hath found the king and poisoned his mind
against thee.'

'Had I known of this,' said Sir Lancelot, 'I would have brought the
queen away with me and put her in a safe place, for now I know that her
enemies and mine will not rest until she and I be slain.'

But Sir Bors counselled him not to attempt a rescue then, for day was
breaking, the town was awake, and the court would be full of the armed
retainers of the slain knights.

Then, while Sir Lancelot rested himself, Sir Bors went out to the
lodgings of such of his kinsmen as might not be gone with the king, and
he found that now all had returned to London with the king, that Sir
Mordred had met them on their way, and had told King Arthur of the
fight, and had, moreover, charged Sir Lancelot and the queen with
conspiring together to gain the crown.

Sad indeed was Sir Bors to hear this; but, going about the town, he got
together the kinsmen of Sir Lancelot and such of his friends as would
cast in their lot with him in so weighty and terrible a thing as civil
war. By seven of the clock he had got together good and valiant knights
to the number of fourscore, all horsed and armed.

Then he told them to betake themselves to a privy place in a wood
beyond the city walls to the north, and there in a little while came
Sir Lancelot with Sir Bors, and held counsel with them. He told them
all that had befallen him in the fight with the twelve knights, and
they in their turn related how Sir Mordred had met them and had told
his evil tales against the queen and Lancelot, and how for long the
king was too wroth and too sad to listen. But afterwards, when Sir
Mordred told how Sir Pinel, who had spoken of these things, had been
poisoned at the feast given by the queen, King Arthur had wept, and
then was very stern and quiet and said no word more.

'Now, my lords,' said Sir Lancelot, when they had done speaking, 'ye
know well how evil are these plots, how baseless are these foul rumours
against me. But now they have been launched against me, and I have
slain men on account of them, I fear we shall be hard put to it to get
peace again. Those men were set on to betray me; and I doubt not mine
enemies will have the queen burnt, to revenge themselves upon her and
upon me. Therefore, fair lords, what counsel do ye give?'

'Sir,' said Sir Bors, when they had spoken together a little, 'we think
there is but one thing to be done first: that ye knightly rescue the
queen, if your enemies force the king to put her to the stake. For if
she be burnt, then it would be to your shame, seeing that you vowed
yourself her true knight when she came, a young fair bride, to our
king, twenty years agone. And in whatsoever way ye would rescue her, ye
may count upon us to our last breath.'

With a great shout all the other knights raised their right hands in
the air and cried: 'Yea! yea!'

Then, by the advice of Sir Lancelot, they kept hidden in the little
wood, while one went into the city to learn what was being done, and in
what manner the queen was to be treated.

Meanwhile, in the hall of the palace of King Arthur, men sat or stood
with anxious looks, glancing in silence at the king, as he walked up
and down apart, with a stern look on his face.

Then Sir Mador strode forward and said:

'Lord, I do require you to perform your promise to me, to wit, that the
queen be brought to the stake, unless one be found to do combat on her
behalf.'

'What I have promised I will fulfil,' said the king; and men sorrowed
to see how heavy of anguish were his looks, and full of sorrow his
words.

'Lord king,' said Sir Mordred, 'we have shamefully suffered much wrong
at the hands of Sir Lancelot. I appeal to thee that he be seized, so
that the kin of those whom he slew this last night may have vengeance
upon him.'

Then came Sir Gawaine forward quickly, and his face was dark with anger
and his words hot.

'Lord,' he cried, 'listen not to such tales, for I doubt not it was
only by evil plots that Sir Lancelot was forced to slay those whom he
slew. For I trust not Sir Mordred.'

'So God us help,' said Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris, 'we too will not be
known to be of the same mind as our brother Sir Mordred.'

'Then will I do as I deem it best, to gain what I deem right,' replied
Sir Mordred.

'I believe that thou wilt do it in thine own hidden ways,' said Sir
Gawaine, and looked fiercely at his brother, 'for in all unhappiness
and evil thou art to be found, if men but seek in the darkest place and
look for the most secret foe.'

'I appeal to you, lord,' said Sir Mordred to the king, 'to proclaim Sir
Lancelot a false traitor to you and to your realm.'

'And I,' said Sir Gawaine, 'will bid ye remember, lord king, that if ye
will make war between us and Sir Lancelot, there will be many kings and
great lords hold with him. And I would ask you, how many times hath Sir
Lancelot done noble deeds on our behalf and proved himself the best
knight of us all? Did he not rescue twenty of us from the dungeons of
Sir Turquine? Hath he not avenged shame upon the king and the queen,
and the fame of the Round Table many a time? Methinketh, my uncle, that
such kind deeds should be well remembered.'

'Think ye,' said the king, 'that I am not loath to begin so evil and
terrible a thing as civil war? Man, it rendeth my heart to think it.
And I tell thee, Sir Mordred, I will not begin it, except I have proofs
of what ye charge upon Sir Lancelot. And as he is the best knight of ye
all, and the most valiant, I will not judge him before I hear him. If I
know him well, he will come hither and challenge the knight to combat
that doth bring these charges against him, and in that will I trust,
for God shall surely defend the right. Therefore, let a messenger be
sent to Sir Lancelot requiring him, by his knighthood, to appear before
me here, and make answer to the charges thou hast against him.'

This was not as Sir Mordred desired; for he did not doubt that if Sir
Lancelot came he would have little trouble to persuade the king that he
was innocent. When the messenger was gone, therefore, Sir Mordred sent
a servant after him, who slew him in a wood and hid his body under a
bush.

Meanwhile, Sir Mordred counselled Sir Mador to repeat his demand that
the king should cause the queen to be led to the stake, since no knight
had come forward and offered to fight for her.

For a time the king put him off, hoping that as soon as Sir Lancelot
received his commands he would come instantly. Very anxiously did the
king look to the door, hoping to see the tall form of his best knight
come towering through the hall.

Instead thereof came the crafty servant of Sir Mordred, throwing
himself at the feet of the king.

'Gracious lord,' cried he, panting as if from swift running, 'I have
even now come from the place where Sir Lancelot and his friends are
hiding. I am one of their servants, but I hate their treason against
ye, and therefore I am come to tell you of this greatest treason of
all. They have slain your messenger, my lord, him that came requiring
Sir Lancelot to appear before thee. Sir Lancelot ran upon him when he
gave his message and slew him, saying, "Thus do I answer the saucy
words of him who shall not much longer be king."'

The king looked at the face of the messenger long and sadly. The pain
which the king suffered would have softened any ordinary heart; but the
murderer was a hard and callous wretch, and his brazen eyes outlooked
the king.

'Then is Sir Lancelot changed indeed,' said the king, and walked away
with bowed head and moist eyes.

Sir Mador pushed forward again, repeating his demand.

'Have it as ye will,' said the king heavily, and went quickly into his
private chamber.

'Alas!' said Sir Gawaine and Sir Gareth, 'now is the whole realm
falling to ruin, and the noble fellowship of the Round Table shall be
scattered in civil war.'

Soon a page came to Sir Gawaine, telling him that the king would speak
to him.

'Gawaine,' said the king, when the knight went to him, 'I have been too
easy with this knight, Sir Lancelot. He hath slain eleven knights of
the Round Table and my messenger. The pride and ambition of that man
shall have a check. His great fame for valiant deeds hath made him mad,
until it would seem that nothing but this realm will content him. Now,
therefore, as justice demands, and Sir Mador requires, do ye lead the
queen to the fire. She shall have the law as is right. Afterwards we
will seize Sir Lancelot; and know ye, he shall have a hard and shameful
death.'

'Heaven forbid,' said Sir Gawaine, 'that ever I should see either of
these things. For I will believe not these reports of Sir Lancelot.'

'How now?' said the king, 'truly ye have little cause to love him. This
night last past he slew Sir Agravaine, your brother, and several of
your kindred with him; and also, Sir Gawaine, remember how he slew but
lately two sons of yours in battle against the oppressing lords of the
borders.'

'My lord,' said Sir Gawaine, 'I know these things, and for their deaths
I have grieved, but I warned them all, and as they sought their deaths
wilfully I will not avenge them, nor think worse of Sir Lancelot.'

'Nevertheless,' said the king, 'I pray you will make ready with your
brothers, Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth, to take the queen to the fire,
there to have her judgment and receive her death.'

'Nay, most noble lord,' replied the knight sadly, 'that will I never
do. I will never stand by to see so noble a queen meet so shameful a
death.'

'Then,' said the king sadly, 'suffer your brothers, Sir Gareth and Sir
Gaheris, to be there.'

'They are younger than I,' replied Sir Gawaine, 'and they may not say
you nay.'

The king commanded the two brothers of Sir Gawaine to come to him, and
told them what he desired of them.

'Sir,' said Sir Gareth, 'it is in your power to command us to lead the
queen to her shameful end; but wit you well it is sore against our
will. We will go as ye bid, but it shall be in peaceable guise, for we
tell you straightway, we will not oppose a rescue, should any so
desire.'

'Alas!' said Sir Gawaine, and wept, 'that ever I should live to see
this woful day.'

Then the two knights went to the queen and sorrowfully bade her prepare
for her death. Very pale was the queen, but very quiet, for now that
this was come which she had dreaded night and day, she would bear
herself proudly like a queen, innocent as she knew she was of any
crime.

Her ladies dressed her in her meanest garments; a priest, her
confessor, was brought to her, and she was shriven of her sins. Then
arose a weeping and a wailing and a wringing of hands among the lords
and ladies.

Between the knights and the men-at-arms she was led through the streets
to the lists beyond the wall. Lamentation, cries of horror, and the
shrieks and sighs of women arose from the multitude which lined each
side of the narrow streets. Many were the prayers that rose from white
lips, praying God to send a miracle to rescue so sweet a lady from so
dreadful a doom.

The city apprentices, with stout sticks in their hands, stood in bands,
and in their stout young hearts was a great rage. It was in their minds
to dash upon the guard of armoured knights, to attempt a rescue, but
they knew how vain their sticks would be against the keen blades of
swords.

So stricken with horror were all those that looked on that they noticed
not how, when the queen and her guard issued from the gates of the
palace, a man in the coarse dress of a peasant, who was standing in the
crowd, strode swiftly away down a narrow lane. There he vaulted, with
an unpeasant-like deftness, upon a good steed that stood in the charge
of a young lad; and striking spurs in the horse's flanks, he dashed
away madly along the streets and through the northern gate into the
fields.

Amidst the sorrowing people, with women crying and men muttering and
looking darkly at the knights about her, the queen was led to the
tilting-ground beyond the northern wall, and in the midst thereof was a
stake. To this she was fastened with a rope, and faggots of wood were
piled about her feet up to her knees. Near her stood the priest of her
household, trying to cheer her with comforting words; but the queen,
pale and without tears, seemed to be dazed and as if she did not hear
him.

A hundred knights ranged themselves behind the queen, some on
horseback, but the most on foot. Many of them had followed the example
of Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth and stood without arms; but Sir Mador was
on his horse, fully armed, and prepared for combat. Others of his
kindred rode beside him.

Then Sir Gaheris called upon the herald to proclaim what the king had
commanded.

'In the name of the king,' cried the herald, 'the queen hath been found
guilty of the death of a knight by treason and poison, and his kinsmen
have demanded due judgment upon her. But if any knight shall take upon
himself to do battle for her, let him appear instantly. If none do
appear, then shall she suffer the death by burning as the law doth
appoint.'

The herald ceased; the people in the seats, craning this way and that,
looked eagerly up and down the lists to see if any knight came.

They saw Sir Mador, in the forefront of the troop of mounted knights,
glance about him; but no armed man moved forward to do battle for the
innocence of the queen. Then he looked to where she stood, pale and
still, and men saw him smile faintly, as if his cruel heart already
rejoiced to think that she would surely burn.

A great stillness was on the multitude of people. The eyes of all the
citizens of London were bent upon that long wide space of sand within
the lists; many, blurred by tears, could not bear to look at the white
figure in the midst of the faggots.

Men and women held their breath. They saw Sir Mador look towards Sir
Gaheris, as if to ask him why he delayed giving the signal for the
executioner to go forward to do his duty.

Sir Gaheris stood looking down the lists towards the great entrance.
His brother, Sir Gareth, was beside him, and in the hearts of both were
prayers which asked that something might happen to prevent them doing
this dreadful deed upon their fair queen.

'I do call upon you, Sir Gaheris, to fulfil the law!'

Sir Mador's harsh voice rang out in the silence, startling all. With
the sound, Sir Gaheris threw up his hands in a gesture of despair. He
turned to the executioner, who stood beside a cauldron of fire, and
pointed to the queen.

Horror held the great multitude in silence, and all eyes watched the
man put his torch in the fire, and then carry it blazing towards the
faggots.

Suddenly men heard a strange throbbing sound, as if from a distance;
then quickly it changed into the fierce beat of horses' hoofs; and
before many could realise what it meant, through the great gate at the
end of the lists dashed knights in armour, on horses whose foam-flecked
trappings showed at what a speed they had come.

At the head of them rode a great knight; and as men caught the device
upon his shield a great roar of gladness burst from the throats of the
people, while women sobbed for joy.

'Sir Lancelot! Sir Lancelot to the rescue!' was the cry.

As the knights entered, Sir Mador's quick commands sounded, and the
knights about him ran forward and surrounded the queen. They had barely
reached the place when, with a great crashing sound, the party of Sir
Lancelot was upon them. Many of Sir Mador's people were at once thrown
headlong to the ground by the force of the shock; but the others fought
fiercely.

This way and that the battle swayed; Sir Mador trying to thrust the
others from the fire, and Sir Lancelot's kinsmen striving to reach the
queen. All was in confusion; the knights on foot were mingled with
those on horseback, and many were cut down who did not bear arms.

Full of a mad wrath was Sir Lancelot, as he raged among the knights
that stood about the faggots; nor could any withstand him. So blind was
he in his fury that he knew not whom he slew, except that they were men
who stood between him and the queen.

So, by great mischance, at this rushing and hurtling, he slew two
knights and knew not that they were unarmed, and that they were of
those he loved most. One was Sir Gareth, whom he had himself knighted,
and the other was Sir Gaheris. In very truth Sir Lancelot knew them
not; and afterwards they were found dead where the corpses lay
thickest.

Short but very fierce was that battle, for none could long withstand
the fury of Sir Lancelot and his kinsmen. Many were slain on both
sides; Sir Mador had his head sheared from his shoulders by a stroke of
Sir Lancelot's sword, and the remnant of his party fled.

Then Sir Lancelot rode to the queen, cut her bonds, and lifted her upon
his horse full tenderly. Her eyes streamed with tears as she returned
thanks to God for her deliverance, and hardly could she tell her
gratitude to Sir Lancelot.

Thus, with the continued praises of the people in his ears, Sir
Lancelot fared forth amidst his kinsmen, and taking the road northwards
he rode with the queen to his own castle of Joyous Gard.

'For,' said he, 'I will keep the queen in safety until I know that the
king is assured of our innocence of any treason against him. But I
doubt our enemies have poisoned his mind, for never else would he have
suffered her to go to the stake.'

But therein was Sir Lancelot in great error, as in much grief and
remorse he came later to see; for if instantly he had taken the queen
to the king, and had dared his enemies to prove his treason and the
queen's, they would have been instantly discountenanced, and King
Arthur would have known and loved him as he had ever done, for a true
knight and a peerless one.

Nevertheless, Sir Lancelot would ever have had the hatred of Sir
Gawaine, which was caused by his slaying, though unwittingly, the two
good knights, Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth; whereof came great bale and
sorrow.


