There was once a king who was passionately in love with a beautiful
princess , but she could not be married because a magician had
enchanted her . The king went to a good fairy to inquire what he should
do . Said the fairy , after receiving him graciously; "Sir , I will tell
you a secret . The princess has a great cat whom she loves so well that
she cares for nothing and nobody else; but she will be obliged to
marry any person who is adroit enough to walk upon the cat's tail . "

"That will not be very difficult , " thought the king to himself , and
departed , resolving to trample the cat's tail to pieces rather than
not succeed in walking upon it . He went immediately to the palace of
his fair mistress and the cat; the animal came in front of him , 
arching its back in anger as it was wont to do . The king lifted up his
foot , thinking nothing would be so easy as to tread on the tail , but
he found himself mistaken . Minon--that was the creature's
name--twisted itself round so sharply that the king only hurt his own
foot by stamping on the floor . For eight days did he pursue the cat
everywhere: up and down the palace he was after it from morning till
night , but with no better success; the tail seemed made of
quicksilver , so very lively was it . At last the king had the good
fortune to catch Minon sleeping , when tramp , tramp ! he trod on the
tail with all his force . 

Minon woke up , mewed horribly , and immediately changed from a cat into
a large , fierce-looking man , who regarded the king with flashing eyes . 

"You must marry the princess , " cried he , "because you have broken the
enchantment in which I held her; but I will be revenged on you . You
shall have a son with a nose as long as--that;" he made in the air a
curve of half a foot; "yet he shall believe it is just like all other
noses , and shall be always unfortunate till he has found out it is
not . And if you ever tell anybody of this threat of mine , you shall
die on the spot . " So saying , the magician disappeared . 

The king , who was at first much terrified , soon began to laugh at this
adventure . "My son might have a worse misfortune than too long a
nose , " thought he . "At least it will hinder him neither in seeing nor
hearing . I will go and find the princess , and marry her at once . "

He did so , but he only lived a few months after , and died before his
little son was born , so that nobody knew anything about the secret of
the nose . 

The little prince was so much wished for , that when he came into the
world they agreed to call him Prince Wish . He had beautiful blue eyes
and a sweet little mouth , but his nose was so big that it covered half
his face . The queen , his mother , was inconsolable; but her ladies
tried to satisfy her by telling her that the nose was not nearly so
large as it seemed , that it would grow smaller as the prince grew
bigger , and that if it did not a large nose was indispensable to a
hero . All great soldiers , they said , had great noses , as everybody
knew . The queen was so very fond of her son that she listened eagerly
to all this comfort . Shortly she grew so used to the prince's nose
that it did not seem to her any larger than ordinary noses of the
court; where , in process of time , everybody with a long nose was very
much admired , and the unfortunate people who had only snubs were taken
very little notice of . 

Great care was observed in the education of the prince; and as soon as
he could speak they told him all sorts of amusing tales , in which all
the bad people had short noses , and all the good people had long ones . 
No person was suffered to come near him who had not a nose of more
than ordinary length; nay , to such an extent did the courtiers carry
their fancy , that the noses of all the little babies were ordered to
be pulled out as far as possible several times a day , in order to make
them grow . But grow as they would , they never could grow as long as
that of Prince Wish . When he was old enough his tutor taught him
history; and whenever any great king or lovely princess was referred
to , the tutor always took care to mention that he or she had a long
nose . All the royal apartments were filled with pictures and portraits
having this peculiarity , so that at last Prince Wish began to regard
the length of his nose as his greatest perfection , and would not have
had it an inch less even to save his crown . 

When he was twenty years old his mother and his people wished him to
marry . They procured for him the likenesses of many princesses , but
the one he preferred was Princess Darling , daughter of a powerful
monarch and heiress to several kingdoms . Alas ! with all her beauty , 
this princess had one great misfortune , a little turned-up nose , 
which , every one else said , made her only the more bewitching . But
here , in the kingdom of Prince Wish , the courtiers were thrown by it
into the utmost perplexity . They were in the habit of laughing at all
small noses; but how dared they make fun of the nose of Princess
Darling ? Two unfortunate gentlemen , whom Prince Wish had overheard
doing so , were ignominiously banished from the court and capital . 

After this , the courtiers became alarmed , and tried to correct their
habit of speech; but they would have found themselves in constant
difficulties , had not one clever person struck out a bright idea . He
said that though it was indispensably necessary for a man to have a
great nose , women were different; and that a learned man had
discovered in a very old manuscript that the celebrated Cleopatra , 
Queen of Egypt , the beauty of the ancient world , had a turned-up nose . 
At this information Prince Wish was so delighted that he made the
courtier a very handsome present , and immediately sent off ambassadors
to demand Princess Darling in marriage . 

She accepted his offer at once , and returned with the ambassadors . He
made all haste to meet and welcome her; but when she was only three
leagues distant from his capital , before he had time even to kiss her
hand , the magician who had once assumed the shape of his mother's cat , 
Minon , appeared in the air and carried her off before the lover's very
eyes . 

Prince Wish , almost beside himself with grief , declared that nothing
should induce him to return to his throne and kingdom till he had
found Darling . He would suffer none of his courtiers or attendants to
follow him; but , bidding them all adieu , mounted a good horse , laid
the reins on the animal's neck , and let him take him wherever he
would . 

The horse entered a wide-extended plain , and trotted on steadily the
whole day without finding a single house . Master and beast began
almost to faint with hunger; and Prince Wish might have wished himself
safe at home again , had he not discovered , just at dusk , a cavern , 
where there sat , beside a bright lantern , a little woman who might
have been more than a hundred years old . 

She put on her spectacles the better to look at the stranger , and he
noticed that her nose was so small that the spectacles would hardly
stay on; then the prince and the fairy , --for it was a fairy--burst
into a mutual fit of laughter . 

"What a funny nose ? " cried the one . 

"Not so funny as yours , madam , " returned the other . "But pray let us
leave our noses alone , and be good enough to give me something to
eat , for I am dying with hunger , and so is my poor horse . "

"With all my heart , " answered the fairy . "Although your nose is
ridiculously long , you are no less the son of one of my best friends . 
I loved your father like a brother; _he_ had a very handsome nose . "

"What is wanting to my nose ? " asked Wish , rather savagely . 

"Oh ! nothing at all . On the contrary there is a great deal too much of
it; but never mind , one may be a very honest man , and yet have too big
a nose . As I said , I was a great friend of your father's; he came
often to see me . I was very pretty then , and oftentimes he used to say
to me , 'My sister--'"

"I will hear the rest , madam , with pleasure , when I have supped; but
will you condescend to remember that I have tasted nothing all day ? "

"Poor boy , " said the fairy , "I will give you some supper directly; and
while you eat it I will tell you my history in six words , for I hate
much talking . A long tongue is as insupportable as a long nose; and I
remember when I was young how much I used to be admired because I was
not a talker; indeed , some one said to the queen , my mother , --for poor
as you see me now I am the daughter of a great king , who always--"

"Ate when he was hungry , I hope , " interrupted the Prince , whose
patience was fast departing . 

"You are right , " said the imperturbable old fairy; "and I will bring
you your supper directly , only I wish first just to say that the king
my father--"

"Hang the king your father ! " Prince Wish was about to exclaim , but he
stopped himself , and only observed that however the pleasure of her
conversation might make him forget his hunger , it could not have the
same effect upon his horse , who was really starving . 

The fairy , pleased at his civility , called her servants and bade them
supply him at once with all he needed . "And , " added she , "I must say
you are very polite and very good-tempered , in spite of your nose . "

"What has the old woman to do with my nose ? " thought the prince . "If I
were not so very hungry I would soon show her what she is--a regular
old gossip and chatter-box . She to fancy she talks little , indeed ! One
must be very foolish not to know one's own defects . This comes of
being born a princess . Flatterers have spoiled her , and persuaded her
that she talks little . Little , indeed ! I never knew anybody chatter so
much . "

While the prince thus meditated , the servants were laying the table , 
the fairy asking them a hundred unnecessary questions , simply for the
pleasure of hearing herself talk . "Well , " thought Wish , "I am
delighted that I came hither , if only to learn how wise I have been in
never listening to flatterers , who hide from us our faults , or make us
believe they are perfections . But they could never deceive me . I know
all my own weak points , I trust . " As truly he believed he did . 

So he went on eating contentedly , nor stopped till the old fairy began
to address him . 

"Prince , " said she , "will you be kind enough to turn a little ? Your
nose casts such a shadow that I cannot see what is in my plate . And , 
as I was saying , your father admired me and always made me welcome at
court . What is the court etiquette there now ? Do the ladies still go
to assemblies , promenades , balls ? --I beg your pardon for laughing , but
how _very_ long your nose is . "

"I wish you would cease to speak of my nose , " said the prince , 
becoming annoyed . "It is what it is , and I do not desire it any
shorter . "

"Oh ! I see that I have vexed you , " returned the fairy . "Nevertheless , 
I am one of your best friends , and so I shall take the liberty of
always--" She would doubtless have gone on talking till midnight; but
the prince , unable to bear it any longer , here interrupted her , 
thanked her for her hospitality , bade her a hasty adieu , and rode
away . 

He travelled for a long time , half over the world , but he heard no
news of Princess Darling . However , in each place he went to , he heard
one remarkable fact--the great length of his own nose . The little boys
in the streets jeered at him , the peasants stared at him , and the more
polite ladies and gentlemen whom he met in society used to try in vain
to keep from laughing , and to get out of his way as soon as they
could . So the poor prince became gradually quite forlorn and solitary;
he thought all the world was mad , but still he never thought of there
being anything queer about his own nose . 

At last the old fairy , who , though she was a chatter-box , was very
good-natured , saw that he was almost breaking his heart . She felt
sorry for him , and wished to help him in spite of himself , for she
knew the enchantment , which hid from him the Princess Darling , could
never be broken till he had discovered his own defect . So she went in
search of the princess , and being more powerful than the magician , 
since she was a good fairy , and he was an evil magician , she got her
away from him , and shut her up in a palace of crystal , which she
placed on the road which Prince Wish had to pass . 

He was riding along , very melancholy , when he saw the palace; and at
its entrance was a room , made of the purest glass , in which sat his
beloved princess , smiling and beautiful as ever . He leaped from his
horse , and ran towards her . She held out her hand for him to kiss , but
he could not get at it for the glass . Transported with eagerness and
delight , he dashed his sword through the crystal , and succeeded in
breaking a small opening , to which she put up her beautiful rosy
mouth . But it was in vain , Prince Wish could not approach it . He
twisted his neck about , and turned his head on all sides , till at
length , putting up his hand to his face , he discovered the
impediment . 

"It must be confessed , " exclaimed he , "that my nose _is_ too long . "

That moment the glass walls all split asunder , and the old fairy
appeared , leading Princess Darling . 

"Avow , prince , " said she , "that you are very much obliged to me , for
now the enchantment is ended . You may marry the object of your choice . 
But , " added she , smiling , "I fear I might have talked to you for ever
on the subject of your nose , and you would not have believed me in its
length , till it became an obstacle to your own inclinations . Now
behold it ! " and she held up a crystal mirror . "Are you satisfied to be
no different from other people ? "

"Perfectly , " said Prince Wish , who found his nose had shrunk to an
ordinary length . And , taking the Princess Darling by the hand , he
kissed her , courteously , affectionately , and satisfactorily . Then they
departed to their own country , and lived very happy all their days . 


