The pleasurable excitement of a deer-hunt has never, I believe,
been regarded from the deer's point of view. I happen to be in a
position, by reason of a lucky Adirondack experience, to present it
in that light.

Early on the morning of the 23d of August, 1877, a doe was feeding
on Basin Mountain. The night had been warm and showery, and the
morning opened in an undecided way. The wind was southerly: it is
what the deer call a dog-wind, having come to know quite well the
meaning of "a southerly wind and a cloudy sky." The sole companion
of the doe was her only child, a charming little fawn, whose brown
coat was beginning to be mottled with the beautiful spots which
make this young creature as lovely as the gazelle. The buck, its
father, had been that night on a long tramp across the mountain to
Clear Pond, and had not yet returned.

The doe was feeding, daintily cropping the tender leaves of the
young shoots, and turning from time to time to regard her
offspring. The fawn had taken his morning meal, and now lay curled
up on a bed of moss, watching contentedly, with his large,
soft-brown eyes, every movement of his mother. The great eyes
followed her with an alert entreaty; and, if the mother stepped a
pace or two further away in feeding, the fawn made a half-movement,
as if to rise and follow her. You see, she was his sole dependence
in all the world. But he was quickly reassured when she turned her
gaze on him; and if, in alarm, he uttered a plaintive cry, she
bounded to him at once, and, with every demonstration of affection,
licked his mottled skin till it shone again.

It was a pretty picture--maternal love on the one part, and happy
trust on the other. The doe was a beauty, and would have been so
considered anywhere, as graceful and winning a creature as the sun
that day shone on--slender limbs, not too heavy flanks, round body,
and aristocratic head, with small ears, and luminous, intelligent,
affectionate eyes. How alert, supple, free, she was! What untaught
grace in every movement! What a charming pose when she lifted her
head, and turned it to regard her child! You would have had a
companion-picture, if you had seen, as I saw that morning, a baby
kicking about among the dry pine-needles on a ledge above the
Ausable, in the valley below, while its young mother sat near, with
an easel before her, touching in the color of a reluctant
landscape, giving a quick look at the sky and the outline of the
Twin Mountains, and bestowing every third glance upon the laughing
boy-art in its infancy.

The doe lifted her head a little with a quick motion, and turned
her ear to the south. Had she heard something? Probably it was only
the south wind in the balsams. There was silence all about in the
forest. If the doe had heard anything it was one of the distant
noises of the world. There are in the woods occasional moanings,
premonitions of change, which are inaudible to the dull ears of
men, but which, I have no doubt, the forest-folk hear and
understand. If the doe's suspicions were excited for an instant,
they were gone as soon.

But suddenly she started, head erect, eyes dilated, a tremor in her
limbs. She took a step; she turned her head to the south; she
listened intently. There was a sound--a distant, prolonged note,
bell-toned, pervading the woods, shaking the air in smooth
vibrations. It was repeated. The doe had no doubt now. She shook
like the sensitive mimosa when a footstep approaches. It was the
baying of a hound! It was far off--at the foot of the mountain.
Time enough to fly; time enough to put miles between her and the
hound, before he should come upon her fresh trail; time enough to
escape away through the dense forest and hide in the recesses of
Panther Gorge; yes, time enough. But there was the fawn. The cry of
the hound was repeated, more distinct this time. The mother
instinctively bounded away a few paces. The fawn started up with an
anxious bleat. The doe turned; she came back; she couldn't leave
it. She bent over it, and licked it, and seemed to say, "Come, my
child; we are pursued; we must go." She walked away toward the
west, and the little thing skipped after her. It was slow going for
the slender legs, over the fallen logs, and through the rasping
bushes. The doe bounded in advance, and waited; the fawn scrambled
after her, slipping and tumbling along, very groggy yet on its
legs, and whining a good deal because its mother kept always moving
away from it.

Shortly came a sound that threw the doe into a panic of terror--a
short, sharp yelp, followed by a prolonged howl, caught up and
re-echoed by other bayings along the mountain-side. The doe knew
what that meant. One hound had caught her trail, and the whole pack
responded to the "view-halloo." The danger was certain now; it was
near. She could not crawl on in this way; the dogs would soon be
upon them. She turned again for flight: the fawn, scrambling after
her, tumbled over, and bleated piteously. The baying, now
emphasized by the yelp of certainty, came nearer. Flight with the
fawn was impossible. The doe returned ajad stood by it, head erect,
and nostrils distended. She stood perfectly still, but trembling.
Perhaps she was thinking. The fawn took advantage of the situation,
and began to draw his luncheon ration. The doe seemed to have made
up her mind. She let him finish. The fawn, having taken all he
wanted, lay down contentedly, and the doe licked him for a moment.
Then, with the swiftness of a bird, she dashed away, and in a
moment was lost in the forest. She went in the direction of the
hounds.

According to all human calculations, she was going into the jaws of
death. So she was: all human calculations are selfish. She kept
straight on, hearing the baying every moment more distinctly. She
descended the slope of the mountain until she reached the more open
forest of hard-wood. It was freer going here, and the cry of the
pack echoed more resoundingly in the great spaces. She was going
due east, when (judging by the sound, the hounds were not far off,
though they were still hidden by a ridge) she turned away toward
the north, and kept on at a good pace. In five minutes more she
heard the sharp, exultant yelp of discovery, and then the
deep-mouthed howl of pursuit. The hounds had struck her trail where
she turned, and the fawn was safe.

The doe was in good running condition, the ground was not bad, and
she felt the exhilaration of the chase. For the moment, fear left
her, and she bounded on with the exaltation of triumph. For a
quarter of an hour she went on at a slapping pace, clearing the
moose-bushes with bound after bound, flying over the fallen logs,
pausing neither for brook nor ravine. The baying of the hounds grew
fainter behind her. But she struck a bad piece of going, a
dead-wood slash. It was marvellous to see her skim over it, leaping
among its intricacies, and not breaking her slender legs. No other
living animal could do it. But it was killing work. She began to
pant fearfully; she lost ground. The baying of the hounds was
nearer. She climbed the hard-wood hill at a slower gait: but, once
on more level, free ground, her breath came back to her, and she
stretched away with new courage, and maybe a sort of contempt for
her heavy pursuers.

After running at a high speed perhaps half a mile further it
occurred to her that it would be safe now to turn to the west, and,
by a wide circuit, seek her fawn. But, at the moment, she heard a
sound that chilled her heart. It was the cry of a hound to the west
of her. The crafty brute had made the circuit of the slash, and cut
off her retreat. There was nothing to do but to keep on; and on she
went, still to the north, with the noise of the pack behind her. In
five minutes more she had passed into a hillside clearing. Cows and
young steers were grazing there. She heard a tinkle of bells. Below
her, down the mountain-slope, were other clearings, broken by
patches of woods. Fences intervened; and a mile or two down lay the
valley, the shining Ausable, and the peaceful farmhouses. That way
also her hereditary enemies were. Not a merciful heart in all that
lovely valley. She hesitated; it was only for an instant. She must
cross the Slidebrook Valley if possible, and gain the mountain
opposite.

The hunted doe went down "the open," clearing the fences
splendidly, flying along the stony path. It was a beautiful sight.
But consider what a shot it was! If the deer, now, could only have
been caught! No doubt there were tender-hearted people in the
valley who would have spared her life, shut her up in a stable, and
petted her.

The doe went on; she left the saw-mill on John's Brook to her
right; she turned into a wood-path. As she approached Slide Brook,
she saw a boy standing by a tree with a raised rifle. The dogs were
not in sight, but she could hear them coming down the hill. There
was no time for hesitation. With a tremendous burst of speed she
cleared the stream, and, as she touched the bank, heard the "pingof a rifle bullet in the air above her. The cruel sound gave wings
to the poor thing. In a moment more she was in the opening: she
leaped into the travelled road. Which way? Below her in the wood
was a load of hay: a man and a boy, with pitchforks in their hands,
were running toward her. She turned south, and flew along the
street. The town was up. Women and children ran to the doors and
windows; men snatched their rifles; shots were fired; at the big
boarding-houses, the summer boarders, who never have anything to
do, came out and cheered; a camp-stool was thrown from a veranda.
Some young fellows shooting at a mark in the meadow saw the flying
deer, and popped away at her: but they were accustomed to a mark
that stood still. It was all so sudden! There were twenty people
who were just going to shoot her when the doe leaped the road
fence, and went away across a marsh toward the foot-hills. It was a
fearful gantlet to run. But nobody except the deer considered it in
that light. Everybody told what he was just going to do! everybody
who had seen the performance was a kind of hero-everybody except
the deer.

The courage of the panting fugitive was not gone: she was game to
the tip of her high-bred ears. But the fearful pace at which she
had just been going told on her. Her legs trembled, and her heart
beat like a trip-hammer. She slowed her speed perforce, but still
fled industriously up the right bank of the stream. When she had
gone a couple of miles, and the dogs were evidently gaining again,
she crossed the broad, deep brook, climbed the steep, left bank,
and fled on in the direction of the Mount Marcy trail. The fording
of the river threw the hounds off for a time. She knew, by their
uncertain yelping up and down the opposite bank, that she had a
little respite; she used it, however, to push on until the baying
was faint in her ears; and then she dropped, exhausted, upon the
ground.

This rest, brief as it was, saved her life. Roused again by the
baying pack, she leaped forward with better speed, though without
that keen feeling of exhilarating flight that she had in the
morning. It was still a race for life; but the odds were in her
favor, she thought. She did not appreciate the dogged persistence
of the hounds, nor had any inspiration told her that the race is
not to the swift. She was a little confused in her mind where to
go; but an instinct kept her course to the left, and consequently
further away from her fawn. Going now slower, and now faster, as
the pursuit seemed more distant or nearer, she kept to the
southwest, crossed the stream again, left Panther Gorge on her
right, and ran on by Haystack and Skylight in the direction of the
Upper Ausable Pond. I do not know her exact course through this
maze of mountains, swamps, ravines, and frightful wildernesses. I
only know that the poor thing worked her way along painfully, with
sinking heart and unsteady limbs, lying down "dead-beat" at
intervals, and then spurred on by the cry of the remorseless dogs,
until, late in the afternoon, she staggered down the shoulder of a
Bartlett, and stood upon the shore of the lake. If she could put
that piece of water between her and her pursuers, she would be
safe. Had she strength to swim it?

At her first step into the water she saw a sight that sent her back
with a bound. There was a boat midlake; two men were in it. One was
rowing: the other had a gun in his hand. They were looking toward
her: they had seen her. (She did not know that they had heard the
baying of hounds on the mountains, and had been lying in wait for
her an hour.) What should she do? The hounds were drawing near. No
escape that way, even if she could still run. With only a moment's
hesitation she plunged into the lake, and struck obliquely across.
Her tired legs could not propel the tired body rapidly. She saw the
boat headed for her. She turned toward the centre of the lake. The
boat turned. She could hear the rattle of the oar-locks. It was
gaining on her. Then there was a silence. Then there was a splash
of the water just ahead of her, followed by a roar round the lake,
the words "Confound it all!" and a rattle of the oars again. The
doe saw the boat nearing her. She turned irresolutely to the shore
whence she came: the dogs were lapping the water, and howling
there. She turned again to the centre of the lake.

The brave, pretty creature was quite exhausted now. In a moment
more, with a rush of water, the boat was on her, and the man at the
oars had leaned over and caught her by the tail.

"Knock her on the head with that paddle!" he shouted to the
gentleman in the stern.

The gentleman _was_ a gentleman, with a kind, smooth-shaven
face, and might have been a minister of some sort of everlasting
gospel. He took the paddle in his hand. Just then the doe turned
her head, and looked at him with her great, appealing eyes.

"I can't do it! my soul, I can't do it!" and he dropped the paddle.
"Oh, let her go!
"Oh, no!" was the only response of the guide as he slung the deer
round, whipped out his hunting-knife, and made a pass that severed
her jugular.

The buck returned about the middle of the afternoon. The fawn was
bleating piteously, hungry and lonesome. The buck was surprised. He
looked about in the forest. He took a circuit and came back. His
doe was nowhere to be seen. He looked down at the fawn in a
helpless sort of way. The fawn appealed for his supper. The buck
had nothing whatever to give his child--nothing but his sympathy. If
he said anything, this is what he said: "I'm the head of this
family; but, really, this is a novel case. I've nothing whatever
for you. I don't know what to do. I've the feelings of a father;
but you can't live on _them_. Let us travel.
The buck walked away: the little one toddled after him. They
disappeared in the forest.