One or two thousand years ago , there was a rich man , who had a
beautiful and pious wife; they loved one another dearly , but they had
no children . They wished and prayed for some night and day , but still
they had none . In front of their house was a yard , where stood a
Juniper-tree , and under it the wife stood once in winter , and peeled
an apple , and as she peeled the apple she cut her finger , and the
blood fell on the snow . 

"Oh , " said she , sighing deeply and looking sorrowfully at the blood , 
"if I only had a child as red as blood , and as white as snow ! "

While she spoke , she became quite happy; it seemed to her as if her
wish would surely come to pass . Then she went into the house; and a
month passed , and the snow melted; and two months , and the ground was
green; and three months , and the flowers came up out of the earth; and
four months , and all the trees in the wood burst forth , and the green
twigs all grew thickly together; the little birds sang so that the
whole wood rang , and the blossoms fell from the trees . The fifth month
passed , and she stood under the Juniper-tree , and it smelt so
beautiful , and her heart leaped with joy . She fell upon her knees , 
but could not speak . When the sixth month was gone , the fruit was
large and ripe , and she was very quiet; the seventh month , she took
the juniper berries , ate them eagerly , and was sick and sorrowful; and
the eighth month went by , and she called to her husband , and cried and
said , "If I die , bury me under the Juniper-tree . "

After this she was quite comforted and happy , till the next month was
passed , and then she had a child as white as snow and as red as blood . 
When she beheld it , she was so glad , that she died . 

Her husband buried her under the Juniper-tree , and began to mourn very
much; but after a little time , he became calmer , and when he had wept
a little more , he left off weeping entirely , and soon afterwards he
took another wife . 

The second wife brought him a daughter , but the child of the first
wife was a little son , and was as red as blood , and as white as snow . 
When the wife looked at her daughter , she loved her; but when she
looked at the little boy , she hated him , and it seemed as if he were
always in her way , and she was always thinking how she could get all
the property for her daughter . The Evil One possessed her so , that she
was quite angry with the little boy , and pushed him about from one
corner to another , and cuffed him here and pinched him there , until
the poor child was always in fear . When he came home from school , he
could not find a quiet place to creep into . 

Once , when the woman went up to her room , her little daughter came up
too , and said "Mother , give me an apple . "

"Yes , my child , " said the woman , and gave her a beautiful apple out of
the chest; and the chest had a great heavy lid , with a great sharp
iron lock . 

"Mother , " said the little daughter , "shall not brother have one too ? "

That vexed the woman , but she said , "Yes , when he comes from school . "

And when she saw from the window that he was coming , it was just as if
the Evil One came into her , and she snatched away the apple from her
daughter , and said , "You shall not have one before your brother . "

Then she threw the apple into the chest , and shut the lid close down . 
When the little boy came in at the door , the Evil One made her say
kindly , "My son , will you have an apple ? "

Yet she looked so angry all the time , that the little boy said , 
"Mother , how dreadful you look ! Yes , give me an apple . "

Then she felt that she must speak to him . "Come with me , " said she , 
and opened the lid; "pick out an apple for yourself . "

And as the little boy stooped over , the Evil One prompted her , and
smash ! she banged the lid down , so that his head flew off and fell
among the red apples . Then she was seized with terror , and thought , 
"Can I get rid of the blame of this ? " So she went up to her room to
her chest of drawers , and took out of the top drawer a white cloth , 
and placed the head on the neck again , and tied the handkerchief
round it , so that one could see nothing , and set him before the door
on a chair , and gave him the apple in his hand . 

Soon after , little Margery came to her mother , who stood by the
kitchen fire , and had a pot of hot water before her , which she kept
stirring round . 

"Mother , " said little Margery , "brother sits before the door , and
looks quite white , and has an apple in his hand; I asked him to give
me the apple , but he did not answer me , and I was frightened . "

"Go to him again , " said her mother , "and if he will not answer you , 
give him a box on the ear . "

Then Margery went , and said , "Brother , give me the apple . "

But he was silent , so she gave him a box on the ear , and the head fell
down . 

She was frightened , and began to cry and sob , and ran to her mother , 
and said , "Oh , mother , I have knocked my brother's head off ! " and
cried and cried , and would not be comforted . 

"Margery , " said her mother , "what have you done ! --but now be quiet , 
and no one will notice; it cannot be helped now--we will cook him in
vinegar . "

Then the mother took the little boy , and chopped him in pieces , put
him into the pot , and cooked him in vinegar . But Margery stood by , and
cried and cried , and all her tears fell into the pot , so that the
cookery did not want any salt . 

When the father came home , and sat down to dinner , he said , "Where is
my son ? "

The mother brought a great big dish of black soup , and Margery cried
and cried without ceasing . Then the father said again , "Where is my
son ? "

"Oh , " said the mother , "he is gone into the country , to see his uncle , 
where he is going to stay awhile . "

"What does he want there ? And he has not even said good-bye to me ! "

"Oh , he wished very much to go , and asked if he might remain away six
weeks; he is well taken care of there , you know . "

"Well , " said the father , "I am sorry; for he ought to have bade me
good-bye . "

After that he began to eat , and said , "Margery , what are you crying
for ? Brother will be sure to come back . Oh , wife , " continued he , "how
delicious this food tastes; give me some more . " And the more he ate , 
the more he wanted; and he said , "Give me more , you shall not have any
of it; I feel as if it were all mine . " And he ate and ate , throwing
the bones under the table , till he had finished it all . 

But Margery went to her drawers , and took out of the bottom drawer her
best silk handkerchief , and fetched out all the bones from under the
table; she tied them up in the silk handkerchief , and took them out of
doors , and shed bitter tears over them . Then she laid them under the
Juniper-tree in the green grass; and when she had put them there , she
felt all at once quite happy , and did not cry any more . 

Soon the Juniper began to move , and the twigs kept dividing and then
closing , just as if the tree were clapping its hands for joy . After
that there went up from it a sort of mist , and right in the centre of
the mist burnt a fire , and out of the fire flew a beautiful bird , who , 
singing deliciously , rose up high in the air . When he was out of
sight , the Juniper-tree was just as it had been before , only the
handkerchief with the bones was gone . But Margery felt quite pleased
and happy , just as if her brother were still alive . And she went back
merrily into the house to dinner . 

The bird flew away , sat himself on a goldsmith's house , and began to
sing--

 "My mother , she killed me;
 My father , he ate me;
 My sister , little Margery , 
 Gathered up all my bones , 
 Tied them in a silk handkerchief , 
 And laid them under the Juniper-tree:
 Kywitt ! Kywitt ! what a beautiful bird am I ! "

The goldsmith sat in his workshop , making a gold chain , but he heard
the bird , which sat on his roof , and sang , and he thought it very
beautiful . He stood up , and as he went over the door-step he lost one
slipper . But he went right into the middle of the street , with one
slipper and one sock on; he had on his leather apron; in one hand he
carried the gold chain , and in the other the pincers , while the sun
shone brightly up the street . There he stood , and looked at the bird . 

"Bird , " said he , "how beautiful you can sing ! Sing me that song
again . "

"No , " said the bird , "I do not sing twice for nothing . Give me that
gold chain , and I will sing it again . "

"There , " said the goldsmith; "you shall have the gold chain--now sing
me that song once more . "

Then the bird came and took the gold chain in his right claw , and went
and sat before the goldsmith , and sang--

 "My mother , she killed me;
 My father , he ate me;
 My sister , little Margery , 
 Gathered up all my bones , 
 Tied them in a silk handkerchief , 
 And laid them under the Juniper-tree:
 Kywitt ! Kywitt ! what a beautiful bird am I ! "

Afterwards he flew away to a shoemaker's , and set himself on his roof , 
and sang--

 "My mother , she killed me;
 My father , he ate me;
 My sister , little Margery , 
 Gathered up all my bones , 
 Tied them in a silk handkerchief , 
 And laid them under the Juniper-tree:
 Kywitt ! Kywitt ! what a beautiful bird am I ! "

When the shoemaker heard it , he ran out of his door in his
shirt-sleeves , looked towards his roof , and had to hold his hand over
his eyes , so that the sun should not dazzle him . 

"Bird , " said he , "how beautifully you can sing ! " And he called in at
his door , "Wife , just come out; there is a bird here which can sing so
beautifully . " Then he called his daughter and his workpeople , both
boys and girls; they all came into the street , looked at the bird , and
saw how handsome he was; for he had bright red and green feathers , 
and his neck shone like real gold , and his eyes twinkled in his head
like stars . 

"Bird , " said the shoemaker , "now sing me that song again . "

"No , " replied the bird , "I do not sing twice for nothing; you must
give me something . "

"Wife , " said the man , "go to the garret: on the highest shelf there
stands a pair of red shoes--bring them here . "

The wife went and fetched the shoes . 

"There , " said the man , "now sing me that song again . "

Then the bird came and took the shoes in his left claw and flew back
on the roof , and sang--

 "My mother , she killed me;
 My father , he ate me;
 My sister , little Margery , 
 Gathered up all my bones , 
 Tied them in a silk handkerchief , 
 And laid them under the Juniper-tree:
 Kywitt ! Kywitt ! what a beautiful bird am I ! "

And when he had finished , he flew away , with the chain in his right
claw and the shoes in his left . He flew far away to a mill , and the
mill went "Clipper , clapper , clipper , clapper , clipper , clapper . " And
in the mill there sat twenty millers , who chopped a stone , and
chopped , "Hick , hack , hick , hack , hick , hack;" and the mill went , 
"Clipper , clapper , clipper , clapper , clipper , clapper . "

The bird flew up , and sat in a lime-tree that grew before the mill , 
and sang--

 "My mother , she killed me;"

then one man stopped;

 "My father , he ate me;"

then two more stopped and listened;

 "My sister , little Margery , "

then four more stopped;

 "Gathered up all my bones , 
 Tied them in a silk handkerchief , "

now only eight more were chopping , 

 "Laid them under"

now only five , 

 "the Juniper-tree . "

now only one . 

 "Kywitt ! Kywitt ! what a beautiful bird am I ! "

Then the last man stopped too , and heard the last word . 

"Bird , " said he , "how beautifully you sing ! Please to sing me that
song once more . "

"No , " answered the bird , "I do not sing twice for nothing; give me the
millstone , and I will sing it again . "

"Yes , " said he , "if it belonged to me only , you should have it . "

"Yes , " cried all the others , "if he sings it again , he shall have it . "

Then the bird came down , and all the twenty millers took poles , and
lifted the stone up . The bird stuck his neck through the hole in the
millstone , and put it on like a collar , and flew back to the tree , and
sang--

 "My mother , she killed me;
 My father , he ate me;
 My sister , little Margery , 
 Gathered up all my bones , 
 Tied them in a silk handkerchief , 
 And laid them under the Juniper-tree:
 Kywitt ! Kywitt ! what a beautiful bird am I ! "

And when he had done singing , he opened his wings , and though he had
in his right claw the chain , in his left the shoes , and round his neck
the millstone , he flew far away to his father's house . 

In the room sat the father , the mother , and little Margery at dinner;
and the father said , "Oh , how happy I am ! altogether joyful . "

"For me , " said the mother , "I feel quite frightened , as if a dreadful
storm was coming . "

But Margery sat , and cried and cried . 

Then there came the bird flying , and as he perched himself on the
roof , "Oh , " said the father , "I feel so happy , and the sun shines out
of doors so beautifully ! It is just as if I were going to see an old
friend . 

"No , " said the wife; "I am so frightened , my teeth chatter , and it
feels as if there was a fire in my veins;" and she tore open her
dress . But Margery sat in a corner , and cried , holding her apron
before her eyes , till the apron was quite wet through . 

The bird perched upon the Juniper-tree , and sang--

 "My mother , she killed me;"

Then the mother stopped up her ears , and shut her eyes tight , and did
not want to see or hear; but there was a roaring in her ears like the
loudest thunder , and her eyes burned and flashed like lightning--

 "My father , he ate me;"

"Oh , wife , " said the man , "look at that beautiful bird ! --he sings so
splendidly . And the sun shines so warm , and there is a smell like
real cinnamon ! "

 "My sister , little Margery , "

Then Margery laid her head on her knee , and sobbed out loud; but the
man said , "I shall go out--I must look at the bird quite close . "

"Oh , do not go , " said the wife; "it seems to me as if the whole house
shook , and was in flames . "

But the man went out and watched the bird , which still went on
singing--

 "Gathered up all my bones , 
 Tied them in a silk handkerchief , 
 And laid them under the Juniper-tree:
 Kywitt ! Kywitt ! what a beautiful bird am I ! "

After that , the bird let the gold chain fall , and it fell right on to
the man's neck , fitting exactly round it . He went in and said , "See
what a beautiful bird that is--it has given me such a splendid gold
chain ! "

But the wife was frightened , and fell flat down on the floor , and her
cap dropped off her head . 

Then the bird sang again--

 "My mother , she killed me;"

"Oh , that I were a thousand feet under the earth , so that I might not
hear ! "

 "My father , he ate me , "

Then she fell down , as if she was dead . 

 "My sister , little Margery , "

"Oh ! " said Margery , "I will go out too , and see if the bird will give
me anything . "

 "Gathered up all my bones , 
 Tied them in a silk handkerchief , "

And the shoes were thrown down . 

 "And laid them under the Juniper-tree:
 Kywitt ! Kywitt ! what a beautiful bird am I ! "

Then Margery was very joyful; she put on the new red shoes , and danced
and jumped about . "Oh , " said she , "I was so unhappy when I came out , 
and now I am so happy ! That is a wonderful bird; he has given me a
pair of red shoes . "

"For me , " cried the wife , and jumped up , and her hair stood on end
like flames of fire , "I feel as if the world were come to an end; I
will go out--perhaps I shall feel easier . "

But as she went out of the door--smash ! --the bird threw the millstone
on her head , and she was crushed to pieces . 

The father and Margery heard it , and rushed out to see what had
happened: there was a great flame and smoke rising up from the place , 
and when that was gone , there stood the little brother all alive
again--as if he had never died . He took his father and Margery by the
hand , and they were all three quite happy , and went into the house to
dinner . 


