 An amusing allegorical fantasy. All the most interesting
 Days, grandchildren of Mother Year, came to Mrs. November's
 dinner party, to honour the birthday of her daughter,
 Thanksgiving.


The widow November was very busy indeed this year. What with elections
and harvest homes, her hands were full to overflowing; for she takes
great interest in politics, besides being a social body, without whom
no apple bee or corn husking is complete.



Still, worn out as she was, when her thirty sons and daughters
clustered round, and begged that they might have their usual family
dinner on Thanksgiving Day, she could not find it in her hospitable
heart to refuse, and immediately invitations were sent to her eleven
brothers and sisters, old Father Time, and Mother Year, to come with
all their families and celebrate the great American holiday.

Then what a busy time ensued! What a slaughter of unhappy barnyard
families--turkeys, ducks, and chickens! What a chopping of apples and
boiling of doughnuts! What a picking of raisins and rolling of pie
crust, until every nook and corner of the immense storeroom was
stocked with "savoury mince and toothsome pumpkin pies," while so
great was the confusion that even the stolid red-hued servant, Indian
Summer, lost his head, and smoked so continually he always appeared
surrounded by a blue mist, as he piled logs upon the great bonfires in
the yard, until they lighted up the whole country for miles around.

But at length all was ready; the happy day had come, and all the
little Novembers, in their best "bib and tucker," were seated in a
row, awaiting the arrival of their uncles, aunts, and cousins, while
their mother, in russet-brown silk trimmed with misty lace, looked
them over, straightening Guy Fawkes's collar, tying Thanksgiving's
neck ribbon, and settling a dispute between two little presidential
candidates as to which should sit at the head of the table.

Soon a merry clashing of bells, blowing of horns, and mingling of
voices were heard outside, sleighs and carriages dashed up to the
door, and in came, "just in season," Grandpa Time, with Grandma Year
leaning on his arm, followed by all their children and grandchildren,
and were warmly welcomed by the hostess and her family.

"Oh, how glad I am we could all come to-day!" said Mr. January, in his
crisp, clear tones, throwing off his great fur coat, and rushing to
the blazing fire. "There is nothing like the happy returns of these
days.
"Nothing, indeed," simpered Mrs. February, the poetess. "If I had had
time I should have composed some verses for the occasion; but my son
Valentine has brought a sugar heart, with a sweet sentiment on it, to
his cousin Thanksgiving. I, too, have taken the liberty of bringing a
sort of adopted child of mine, young Leap Year, who makes us a visit
every four years.
"He is very welcome, I am sure," said Mrs. November, patting Leap Year
kindly on the head. "And, Sister March, how have you been since we
last met?
"Oh! we have had the North, South, East, and West Winds all at our
house, and they have kept things breezy, I assure you. But I really
feared we should not get here to-day; for when we came to dress I
found nearly everything we had was lent; so that must account for our
shabby appearance.
"He! he! he!" tittered little April Fool. "What a sell!" And he shook
until the bells on his cap rang; at which his father ceased for a
moment showering kisses on his nieces and nephews, and boxed his ears
for his rudeness.

"Oh, Aunt May! do tell us a story," clamoured the younger children,
and dragging her into a corner she was soon deep in such a moving tale
that they were all melted to tears, especially the little Aprils, who
cry very easily.

Meanwhile, Mrs. June, assisted by her youngest daughter, a "sweet girl
graduate," just from school, was engaged in decking the apartment with
roses and lilies and other fragrant flowers that she had brought from
her extensive gardens and conservatories, until the room was a
perfect bower of sweetness and beauty; while Mr. July draped the walls
with flags and banners, lighted the candles, and showed off the tricks
of his pet eagle, Yankee Doodle, to the great delight of the little
ones.

Madam August, who suffers a great deal with the heat, found a seat on
a comfortable sofa, as far from the fire as possible, and waved a huge
feather fan back and forth, while her thirty-one boys and girls, led
by the two oldest, Holiday and Vacation, ran riot through the long
rooms, picking at their Aunt June's flowers, and playing all sorts of
pranks, regardless of tumbled hair and torn clothes, while they
shouted, "Hurrah for fun!" and behaved like a pack of wild colts let
loose in a green pasture, until their Uncle September called them,
together with his own children, into the library, and persuaded them
to read some of the books with which the shelves were filled, or play
quietly with the game of Authors and the Dissected Maps.

"For," said Mr. September to Mrs. October, "I think Sister August lets
her children romp too much. I always like improving games for mine,
although I have great trouble to make Equinox toe the line as he
should.
"That is because you are a schoolmaster," laughed Mrs. October,
shaking her head, adorned with a wreath of gayly tinted leaves; "but
where is my baby?
At that moment a cry was heard without, and Indian Summer came running
in to say that little All Hallows had fallen into a tub of water while
trying to catch an apple that was floating on top, and Mrs. October,
rushing off to the kitchen, returned with her youngest in a very wet
and dripping condition, and screaming at the top of his lusty little
lungs, and could only be consoled by a handful of chestnuts, which his
nurse, Miss Frost, cracked open for him.

The little Novembers, meanwhile, were having a charming time with
their favourite cousins, the Decembers, who were always so gay and
jolly, and had such a delightful papa. He came with his pockets
stuffed full of toys and sugarplums, which he drew out from time to
time, and gave to his best-loved child, Merry Christmas, to distribute
amongst the children, who gathered eagerly around their little cousin,
saying:

 "Christmas comes but once a year,
 But when she comes she brings good cheer.
At which Merry laughed gayly, and tossed her golden curls, in which
were twined sprays of holly and clusters of brilliant scarlet berries.

At last the great folding-doors were thrown open. Indian Summer
announced that dinner was served, and a long procession of old and
young being quickly formed, led by Mrs. November and her daughter
Thanksgiving, whose birthday it was, they filed into the spacious
dining-room, where stood the long table groaning beneath its weight of
good things, while four servants ran continually in and out bringing
more substantials and delicacies to grace the board and please the
appetite. Winter staggered beneath great trenchers of meat and
poultry, pies and puddings; Spring brought the earliest and freshest
vegetables; Summer, the richest creams and ices; while Autumn served
the guests with fruit, and poured the sparkling wine.

All were gay and jolly, and many a joke was cracked as the contents of
each plate and dish melted away like snow before the sun; and the
great fires roared in the wide chimneys as though singing a glad
Thanksgiving song.

New Year drank everybody's health, and wished them "many happy returns
of the day," while Twelfth Night ate so much cake he made himself
quite ill, and had to be put to bed.

Valentine sent mottoes to all the little girls, and praised their
bright eyes and glossy curls. "For," said his mother, "he is a sad
flatterer, and not nearly so truthful, I am sorry to say, as his
brother, George Washington, who never told a lie.
At which Grandfather Time gave George a quarter, and said he should
always remember what a good boy he was.

After dinner the fun increased, all trying to do something for the
general amusement. Mrs. March persuaded her son, St. Patrick, to dance
an Irish Jig, which he did to the tune of the "Wearing of the Green,which his brothers, Windy and Gusty, blew and whistled on their
fingers.

Easter sang a beautiful song, the little Mays "tripped the light
fantastic toe" in a pretty fancy dance, while the Junes sat by so
smiling and sweet it was a pleasure to look at them.

Independence, the fourth child of Mr. July, who is a bold little
fellow, and a fine speaker, gave them an oration he had learned at
school; and the Augusts suggested games of tag and blindman's buff,
which they all enjoyed heartily.

Mr. September tried to read an instructive story aloud, but was
interrupted by Equinox, April Fool, and little All Hallows, who pinned
streamers to his coat tails, covered him with flour, and would not let
him get through a line; at which Mrs. October hugged her tricksy baby,
and laughed until she cried, and Mr. September retired in disgust.

"That is almost too bad," said Mrs. November, as she shook the popper
vigorously in which the corn was popping and snapping merrily; "but,
Thanksgiving, you must not forget to thank your cousins for all they
have done to honour your birthday.
At which the demure little maiden went round to each one, and returned
her thanks in such a charming way it was quite captivating.

Grandmother Year at last began to nod over her teacup in the chimney
corner.

"It is growing late," said Grandpa Time.

"But we must have a Virginia Reel before we go," said Mr. December.

"Oh, yes, yes!" cried all the children.

Merry Christmas played a lively air on the piano, and old and young
took their positions on the polished floor with grandpa and grandma at
the head.

Midsummer danced with Happy New Year, June's Commencement with
August's Holiday, Leap Year with May Day, and all "went merry as a
marriage bell.
The fun was at its height when suddenly the clock in the corner struck
twelve. Grandma Year motioned all to stop, and Grandfather Time,
bowing his head, said softly, "Hark! my children, Thanksgiving Day is
ended.