 Bert is a manly, generous, warm-hearted fellow. Other boys
 will like to read how good luck began to come his way on a
 certain memorable Thanksgiving Day.


At noon, on a dreary November day, a lonesome little fellow, looking
very red about the ears and very blue about the mouth, stood kicking
his heels at the door of a cheap eating house in Boston, and offering
a solitary copy of a morning paper for sale to the people passing.



But there were really not many people passing, for it was Thanksgiving
Day, and the shops were shut, and everybody who had a home to go to
and a dinner to eat seemed to have gone home to eat that dinner, while
Bert Hampton, the newsboy, stood trying in vain to sell the last
"extry" left on his hands by the dull business of the morning.

An old man, with a face that looked pinched, and who was dressed in a
seedy black coat and a much-battered stovepipe hat, stopped at the
same doorway, and, with one hand on the latch, appeared to hesitate
between hunger and a sense of poverty before going in.

It was possible, however, that he was considering whether he could
afford himself the indulgence of a morning paper (seeing it was
Thanksgiving Day); so, at least, Bert thought, and accosted him
accordingly.

"Buy a paper, sir? All about the fire in East Boston, and arrest of
safe-burglars in Springfield. Only two cents!
The little old man looked at the boy with keen gray eyes, which seemed
to light up the pinched and skinny face, and answered in a shrill
voice that whistled through white front teeth:

"You ought to come down in your price this time of day. You can't
expect to sell a morning paper at twelve o'clock for full price.
"Well, give me a cent then," said Bert. "That's less'n cost; but never
mind; I'm bound to sell out anyhow.
"You look cold," said the old man.

"Cold?" replied Bert; "I'm froze. And I want my dinner. And I'm going
to have a big dinner, too, seeing it's Thanksgiving Day.
"Ah! lucky for you, my boy!" said the old man. "You've a home to go
to, and friends, too, I hope?
"No, _sir_; nary home, and nary friend; only my mother"--Bert
hesitated, and grew serious; then suddenly changed his tone--"and Hop
Houghton. I told him to meet me here, and we'd have a first-rate
Thanksgiving dinner together; for it's no fun to be eatin' alone
Thanksgiving Day! It sets a feller thinking of everything, if he ever
had a home and then hain't got a home any more.
"It's more lonesome not to eat at all," said the old man, his gray
eyes twinkling. "And what can a boy like you have to think of? Here, I
guess I can find one cent for you, though there's nothing in the
paper, I know.
The old man spoke with some feeling, his fingers trembled, and somehow
he dropped two cents instead of one into Bert's hand.

"Here! You've made a mistake!" cried Bert. "A bargain's a bargain.
You've given me a cent too much.
"No, I didn't. I never give anybody a cent too much.
"But, see here!" And Bert showed the two cents, offering to return
one.

"No matter," said the old man, "it will be so much less for _my_
dinner, that's all.
Bert had instinctively pocketed the pennies when, on a moment's
reflection, his sympathies were excited.

"Poor old man!" he thought; "he's seen better days I guess. Perhaps
he's no home. A boy like me can stand it, but I guess it must be hard
for _him_. He _meant_ to give me the odd cent all the while; and I
don't believe he has had a decent dinner for many a day.
All this, which I have been obliged to write out slowly in words, went
through Bert's mind like a flash. He was a generous little fellow, and
any kindness shown him, no matter how trifling, made his heart
overflow.

"Look here!" he cried, "where are _you_ going to get your dinner
to-day?
"I can get a bite here as well as anywhere. It don't matter much to
me," replied the old man.

"Dine with _me_," said Bert, laughing. "I'd like to have you.
"I'm afraid I couldn't afford to dine as you are going to," said the
man, with a smile, his eyes twinkling again and his white front teeth
shining.

"I'll pay for your dinner!" Bert exclaimed. "Come! We don't have a
Thanksgiving but once a year, and a feller wants a good time then.
"But you are waiting for another boy.
"Oh, Hop Houghton! He won't come now, it's so late. He's gone to a
place down in North Street, I guess--a place I don't like: there's so
much tobacco smoked and so much beer drank there." Bert cast a final
glance up the street. "No, he won't come now. So much the worse for
him! He likes the men down there; I don't.
"Ah!" said the man, taking off his hat, and giving it a brush with his
elbow, as they entered the restaurant, as if trying to appear as
respectable as he could in the eyes of a newsboy of such fastidious
tastes.

To make him feel quite comfortable in his mind on that point, Bert
hastened to say:

"I mean rowdies, and such. Poor people, if they behave themselves, are
just as respectable to me as rich folks. I ain't the least mite
aristocratic.
"Ah, indeed!" And the old man smiled again, and seemed to look
relieved. "I'm very glad to hear it.
He placed his hat on the floor and took a seat opposite Bert at a
little table, which they had all to themselves.

Bert offered him the bill of fare.

"No, I must ask you to choose for me; but nothing very extravagant,
you know. I'm used to plain fare.
"So am I. But I'm going to have a good dinner for once in my life, and
so shall you!" cried Bert, generously. "What do you say to chicken
soup, and then wind up with a thumping big piece of squash pie? How's
that for a Thanksgiving dinner?
"Sumptuous!" said the old man, appearing to glow with the warmth of
the room and the prospect of a good dinner. "But won't it cost you too
much?
"Too much? No, _sir_!" laughed Bert. "Chicken soup, fifteen cents;
pie--they give tremendous pieces here; thick, I tell you--ten cents.
That's twenty-five cents; half a dollar for two. Of course, I don't do
this way every day in the year. But mother's glad to have me, once in
a while. Here, waiter!" And Bert gave his princely order as if it were
no very great thing for a liberal young fellow like him, after all.

"Where is your mother? Why don't you dine with her?" the little man
asked.

Bert's face grew sober in a moment.

"That's the question: why don't I? I'll tell you why I don't. I've got
the best mother in the world. What I'm trying to do is to make a home
for her, so we can live together and eat our Thanksgiving dinners
together some time. Some boys want one thing, some another. There's
one goes in for good times; another's in such a hurry to get rich he
don't care much how he does it; but what I want most of anything is to
be with my mother and my two sisters again, and I ain't ashamed to say
so.
Bert's eyes grew very tender, and he went on, while his companion
across the table watched him with a very gentle, searching look.

"I haven't been with her now for two years, hardly at all since father
died. When his business was settled up--he kept a little grocery store
on Hanover Street--it was found he hadn't left us anything. We had
lived pretty well up to that time, and I and my two sisters had been
to school; but then mother had to do something, and her friends got
her places to go out nursing, and she's a nurse now. Everybody likes
her, and she has enough to do. We couldn't be with her, of course. She
got us boarded at a good place, but I saw how hard it was going to be
for her to support us, so I said, 'I'm a boy; _I_ can do something for
_myself_. You just pay their board, and keep 'em to school, and I'll
go to work, and maybe help you a little, besides taking care of
myself.'
"What could _you_ do?" said the little old man.

"That's it. I was only 'leven years old, and what could I? What I
should have liked would have been some nice place where I could do
light work, and stand a chance of learning a good business. But
beggars mustn't be choosers. I couldn't find such a place; and I
wasn't going to be loafing about the streets, so I went to selling
newspapers. I've sold newspapers ever since, and I shall be twelve
years old next month.
"You like it?" said the old man.

"I like to get my own living," replied Bert, proudly, "but what I want
is to learn some trade, or regular business, and settle down, and make
a home for--But there's no use talking about that. Make the best of
things, that's my motto. Don't this soup smell good? And don't it
taste good, too? They haven't put so much chicken in yours as they
have in mine. If you don't mind my having tasted it, we'll change.
The old man declined this liberal offer, took Bert's advice to help
himself freely to bread, which "didn't cost anything," and ate his
soup with prodigious relish, as it seemed to Bert, who grew more and
more hospitable and patronizing as the repast proceeded.

"Come, now, won't you have something between the soup and the pie?
Don't be afraid: I'll pay for it. Thanksgiving don't come but once a
year. You won't? A cup of tea, then, to go with your pie?
"I think I _will_ have a cup of tea; you are _so_ kind," said the old
man.

"All right! Here, waiter! Two pieces of your fattest and biggest
squash pie; and a cup of tea, strong, for this gentleman.
"I've told you about myself," added Bert; "suppose, now, _you_ tell
_me_ something.
"About myself?
"Yes. I think that would go pretty well with the pie.
But the man shook his head. "I could go back and tell about my plans
and hopes when I was a lad of your age, but it would be too much like
your own story over again. Life isn't what we think it will be when we
are young. You'll find that out soon enough. I am all alone in the
world now, and I am sixty-seven years old.
"Have some cheese with your pie, won't you? It must be so lonely at
your age! What do you do for a living?
"I have a little place in Devonshire Street. My name is Crooker.
You'll find me up two flights of stairs, back room, at the right. Come
and see me, and I'll tell you all about my business, and perhaps help
you to such a place as you want, for I know several business men. Now
don't fail.
And Mr. Crooker wrote his address with a little stub of a pencil on a
corner of the newspaper which had led to their acquaintance, tore it
off carefully, and gave it to Bert.

Thereupon the latter took a card from his pocket, not a very clean
one, I must say (I am speaking of the card, though the remark will
apply equally well to the pocket) and handed it across the table to
his new friend.

"_Herbert Hampton, Dealer in Newspapers_," the old man read, with his
sharp gray eyes, which glanced up funnily at Bert, seeming to say,
"Isn't this rather aristocratic for a twelve-year-old newsboy?
Bert blushed, and explained: "Got up for me by a printer's boy I know.
I'd done some favours for him, so he made me a few cards. Handy to
have sometimes, you know.
"Well, Herbert," said the little old man, "I'm glad to have made your
acquaintance. The pie was excellent--not any more, thank you--and I
hope you'll come and see me. You'll find me in very humble quarters;
but you are not aristocratic, you say. Now won't you let me pay for my
dinner? I believe I have money enough. Let me see.
Bert would not hear of such a thing, but walked up to the desk and
settled the bill with the air of a person who did not regard a
trifling expense.

When he looked around again the little old man was gone.

"Never mind, I'll go and see him the first chance I have," said Bert,
as he looked at the pencilled strip of newspaper margin again before
putting it into his pocket.

He then went round to his miserable quarters, in the top of a cheap
lodging-house, where he made himself ready, by means of soap and water
and a broken comb, to walk five miles into the suburbs and get a
sight, if only for five minutes, of his mother.

On the following Monday Bert, having a leisure hour, went to call on
his new acquaintance in Devonshire Street.

Having climbed the two flights, he found the door of the back room at
the right ajar, and looking in, saw Mr. Crooker at a desk, in the act
of receiving a roll of money from a well-dressed visitor.

Bert entered unnoticed and waited till the money was counted and a
receipt signed. Then, as the visitor departed, old Mr. Crooker looked
round and saw Bert. He offered him a chair, then turned to lock up the
money in a safe.

"So this is your place of business?" said Bert, glancing about the
plain office room. "What do you do here?
"I buy real estate sometimes--sell--rent--and so forth.
"Who for?" asked Bert.

"For myself," said little old Mr. Crooker, with a smile.

Bert stared, perfectly aghast at the situation. This, then, was the
man whom he had invited to dinner, and treated so patronizingly the
preceding Thursday!

"I--I thought--you was a poor man.
"I _am_ a poor man," said Mr. Crooker, locking his safe. "Money
doesn't make a man rich. I've money enough. I own houses in the city.
They give me something to think of, and so keep me alive. I had truer
riches once, but I lost them long ago.
From the way the old man's voice trembled and eyes glistened, Bert
thought he must have meant by these riches friends he had lost--wife
and children, perhaps.

"To think of _me_ inviting _you_ to dinner!" the boy cried, abashed
and ashamed.

"It _was_ odd." And Mr. Crooker showed his white front teeth with a
smile. "But it may turn out to have been a lucky circumstance for both
of us. I like you; I believe in you; and I've an offer to make to you:
I want a trusty, bright boy in this office, somebody I can bring up to
my business, and leave it with, as I get too old to attend to it
myself. What do you say?
What _could_ Bert say?

Again that afternoon he walked--or rather, ran--to his mother, and
after consulting with her, joyfully accepted Mr. Crooker's offer.

Interviews between his mother and his employer soon followed,
resulting in something for which at first the boy had not dared to
hope. The lonely, childless old man, who owned so many houses, wanted
a home; and one of these houses he offered to Mrs. Hampton, with ample
support for herself and her children, if she would also make it a home
for him.

Of course this proposition was accepted; and Bert soon had the
satisfaction of seeing the great ambition of his youth accomplished.
He had employment which promised to become a profitable business (as
indeed it did in a few years, he and the old man proved so useful to
each other); and, more than that, he was united once more with his
mother and sisters in a happy home where he has since had a good many
Thanksgiving dinners.
