It was nearly time for Thanksgiving Day. The rosy apples and golden
pumpkins were ripe, and the farmers were bringing them into the
markets.



One day when two little children, named John and Minnie, were going to
school, they saw the turkeys and chickens and pumpkins in the window
of a market, and they exclaimed, "Oh, Thanksgiving Day! Oh,
Thanksgiving Day!" After school was over, they ran home to their
mother, and asked her when Thanksgiving Day would be. She told them in
about two weeks; then they began to talk about what they wanted for
dinner, and asked their mother a great many questions. She told them
she hoped they would have turkey and even the pumpkin pie they wanted
so much, but that Thanksgiving Day was not given us so that we might
have a good dinner, but that God had been a great many days and weeks
preparing for Thanksgiving. He had sent the sunshine and the rain and
caused the grains and fruits and vegetables to grow. And Thanksgiving
Day was for glad and happy thoughts about God, as well as for good
things to eat.

Not long after, when John and Minnie were playing, John said to
Minnie, "I wish I could do something to tell God how glad I am about
Thanksgiving." "I wish so, too," said Minnie. Just then some little
birds came flying down to the ground, and Minnie said: "Oh, I know.Then she told John, but they agreed to keep it a secret till the day
came. Now what do you think they did? Well, I will tell you.

They saved their pennies, and bought some corn, and early Thanksgiving
Day, before they had their dinner, they went out into the street near
their home, and scattered corn in a great many places. What for? Why,
for the birds. While they were doing it, John said, "I know, Minnie,
why you thought of the birds: because they do not have any papas and
mammas after they are grown up to get a dinner for them on
Thanksgiving Day." "Yes, that is why," said Minnie.

By and by the birds came and found such a feast, and perhaps they knew
something about Thanksgiving Day and must have sung and chirped
happily all day.
