 Priscilla, the big white hen turkey, deserved a better fate
 than to be eaten on Thanksgiving Day, and Minty and Jason
 contrived to save her.


Mary Ellen was coming home from her school teaching at the Falls, and
Nahum from 'tending in Blodgett's store at Edom Four Corners, and
Uncle and Aunt Piper with Mirandy and Augustus and the twins were
coming from Juniper Hill, and there was every prospect of as merry a
Thanksgiving as one could wish to see. And Thanksgivings were always
merry at the Kittredge farm on Red Hill. Uncle Kittredge might be a
trifle over thrifty--a leetle nigh, his neighbours called him--but
there was no stinting at Thanksgiving, and when a boy is accustomed to
perpetual corn-bread and sausages, he knows how to appreciate
unlimited turkey and plum pudding; and when he is used to gloomy
evenings, in which Uncle Kittredge holds the one feeble kerosene lamp
between himself and a newspaper, Aunt Kittredge knits in silent
meditation on blue yarn stockings, he knows how good it is to have the
house filled with lights and people, jolly games going on in the
parlour, and candy-pulling in the kitchen. All these delights were
directly before Jason Kittredge as he dangled his legs from the stone
wall and whittled away at the skewers which Clorinda, the "hired
girl," had demanded of him, and yet his heart was as heavy as lead.



He did not even look up when his sister Minty came up the hill toward
him. He knew it was Minty, because she was hop-skipping and humming,
and he knew that Aunt Kittredge had sent her to Mrs. Deacon Preble's
to get a recipe for snow pudding; she had said she "must have
something real stylish, because she had invited the new minister and
his daughter to dinner.
"Oh, Jason, don't you wish it was always going to be Thanksgiving Day
after to-morrow?" Minty continued her hop-skipping; she went to and
fro before the dejected figure on the wall. Minty was tall for twelve,
and she had a very high forehead, which made Aunt Kittredge think that
she was going to be "smart." Aunt Kittredge made her comb her hair
straight back from the high forehead, and fasten it with a round comb;
not a vestige of hair showed under Minty's blue hood, and her forehead
looked bleak and cold, and her pale blue eyes were watery, and her new
teeth were large and overlapped each other; but Aunt Kittredge said it
was no matter, if she was only good and "smart.
"Why, Jason, is anything the matter?" Minty stopped, breathless, and
the joy faded out of her face. Jason continued to whittle in gloomy
silence. His hands were almost purple with cold, and the wind flapped
his large pantaloons--they were Uncle Kittredge's old ones, and Aunt
Kittredge never thought it worth the while to consider the fit if they
were turned up so that he could walk in them.

"You don't care because the new minister and his daughter are coming?pursued Minty. Jason's tastes, as she well knew, did not incline to
ministers and schoolmasters as companions in merrymaking. "She's a big
girl, almost sixteen, and she will go with Mary Ellen, and we shall
have Mirandy and Augustus and the twins, and the Sedgell girls and
Nehemiah Ham are coming in the evening, and we shall have such fun,
and such lots to eat!
"That's just like you. You're friv'lous. You don't know what an awful
hard world it is. You haven't got a realizing sense," said Jason
crushingly.

This last accusation was one with which Aunt Kittredge was accustomed
to overwhelm Clorinda when she burned the pies or wore her best bonnet
to evening meeting. Minty's face grew so long that it looked like the
reflection of a face in a spoon, and the tears came into her eyes. It
must be a hard world, since Jason found it so. He was much
stouter-hearted than she; his round, snub-nosed, freckled face was
generally as cheerful as the sunshine. Jason had his troubles--Minty
well knew what they were--but he bore them manfully. He didn't like to
have Clorinda use his hens' eggs when he was saving them to sell, and
perhaps it was even more trying to be at school when the eggs man
came around, and have Aunt Kittredge sell his eggs and put the money
into her pocket. Jason wished to go into business for himself, and he
had a high opinion of the poultry business for a beginning. Cyrus,
their "hired man," had once lived with a man at North Edom who made
fabulous sums by raising poultry. But Aunt Kittredge's peculiar views
of the rights of boys interfered with his accumulation of the
necessary capital. All these troubles Jason bore bravely. It must be
some great misfortune that caused him to look so utterly despairing,
and to accuse her of such dreadful things, thought poor Minty.

Jason took pity on her woful face. "P'raps you're not so much to
blame, Mint. You don't know," he said, in a somewhat softened tone.
"It's Aunt Kittredge.
Minty heaved a long, long sigh. It generally _was_ Aunt Kittredge.

"She's told Cyrus to kill the--the white turkey!" continued Jason,
with almost a break in his voice.

"To kill Priscilla!" gasped Minty. "She couldn't--she wouldn't! Oh,
Jason, Cyrus won't do it, will he?
"Hasn't he got to if she says so?" demanded Jason grimly.

"But Priscilla is yours," said Minty stoutly.

"She says she only let me call her mine. Just as if I didn't save her
out of that weak brood when all the rest were killed by the
thunderstorm! And brought her up in cotton behind the kitchen stove,
no matter how much Clorinda scolded! And found her nest with
thirty-one eggs in it in the old pine stump! And she knows me and
follows me round.
"I shouldn't think Aunt Kittredge would want to," said Minty
reflectively.

"She wants a big turkey, because the minister and his daughter are
coming to dinner, and she doesn't want to have one of the young ones
killed, because she is too stin--
"I wouldn't care if I were you. After all, Priscilla is only a
turkey," said Minty, attempting to be cheerful.

But this well-meant effort at consolation aroused Jason's wrath.
"That's just like a girl!" he cried. "What do you care if you only
have blue beads and lots of candy?
Poor Minty's face lengthened again, and her jaw fell. "There's my two
dollars and thirty cents, Jason," she said anxiously.

Jason started; a ray of hope flushed his freckled face.

"We can buy a big turkey over at Jonas Hicks's for all that money,continued Minty. And then she drew nearer to Jason, and added a
thrilling whisper, "And we can hide Priscilla!
Jason stared at her in amazement. He had never expected Minty to come
to the front in an emergency. Perhaps the high forehead meant
something after all. "_She_'ll be after you about the money, you
know," he said, with a significant nod toward the house.

"It's my own. I earned it picking berries and weeding old Mrs.
Jackman's garden. It's in my bank, and the bank won't open till
there's five dollars in it.
Jason's face darkened.

"But we can smash it," said Minty calmly.

_Certainly_ the high forehead meant something.

Priscilla was hidden. The "smashing" was done in extreme privacy
behind the stone wall of the pasture. Cyrus was bound over to secrecy,
as was also Jonas Hicks, who, after some haggling, sold them his
finest turkey for two dollars and thirty cents.

"Cyrus is gettin' real handy and accommodatin'," said Clorinda the
next morning, when they were all in the kitchen, and Jason, ignobly
arrayed in Clorinda's kitchen-belle apron, was chopping, and Minty was
seeding raisins. "I expected nothin' but what I'd got to pick the
white turkey, and he's fetched her in all picked and drawed.
"She don't weigh quite so much as I expected," said Uncle Kittredge,
as he suspended the turkey on the hook of the old steelyards.

Jason and Minty slyly exchanged anxious glances. Neither of them had
looked at the turkey, and Minty's face was suffused with red even to
the roots of her tow-coloured hair.

Mary Ellen and Nahum came that night, and bright and early on the
morning of Thanksgiving Day came Uncle and Aunt Piper with Mirandy and
Augustus and the twins, and the house was full of noise and jollity.
Jason was obliged to go to church in the morning with the grown
people, but Minty stayed at home to help Clorinda, and after much
manoeuvring she found an opportunity to run down to the shanty in
the logging road and feed the white turkey. The new minister and his
daughter came to dinner, and Jason and Minty were glad that the
children had seats at the far end of the table. The minister's
daughter was sixteen, and looked very stylish, and Aunt Kittredge said
she was glad enough that they had the snow pudding, and that she had
asked Aunt Piper to bring her sauce dishes.

It had begun to be very merry at the far end of the table, in a quiet
way, for Aunt Kittredge's stern eye wandered constantly in that
direction, and Jason and Minty had almost forgotten that there were
trials and difficulties in life, when suddenly Aunt Piper's loud voice
sounded across the table, striking terror to their souls:

"You don't say that this is the white turkey? Seems kind of a pity to
kill her, she was so handsome. But she eats real well. Now, you
mustn't forget to let me take a wing home to Sabriny. You know you
always promised her a wing for her hat when the white turkey was
killed.
Sabriny was Aunt Piper's niece, who had been left at home to keep
house.

"Sure enough I did," said Aunt Kittredge. "Jason, you go out to the
barn and get Cyrus to give you one of the white turkey's wings; and
Minty, you wrap it up nice, so it will be handy for your aunt to
carry. Go as soon as you've ate your dinner, so's to have it ready,
for Uncle Piper has got to get home before sundown.
"Yes'm," answered Jason hoarsely, without lifting his eyes from his
plate. He could scarcely eat another mouthful, and Minty found it
unexpectedly easy to obey Aunt Kittredge's injunction to decline snow
pudding lest there should not be "enough to go round.
"What are you going to do?" asked Minty, overtaking Jason, as he
walked dejectedly through the woodshed as soon as dinner was over.

"I don't know; run away and be a cowboy like Hiram Trickey, I guess.
Minty's heart gave a great throb. Hiram Trickey had sent home a
photograph, which showed him to have become very like the picture of a
pirate in Cyrus's old book, with pistols and a dirk at his belt.

"Jason, the new minister's daughter has got a white gull's wing on her
hat, and--it's up in the spare chamber on the bed, and I don't think
Sabriny would ever know the difference.
Jason stared in mild-eyed speechless wonder. Minty had never shown
herself a leading spirit before.

"It will be dark before the minister's daughter goes, and there's a
veil over the hat, and if we put a little something white on it I'm
sure she won't notice. And when she does notice she won't know what
became of it. And we can save up and buy her another gull's wing.
"Sabriny'll know," said Jason, but there was an accent of hope in his
voice.

"They don't have turkeys, and they know that Priscilla wasn't a common
turkey; perhaps they won't know the difference," said Minty. "Anyway,
it will give us time to get Priscilla out of the way. If Aunt
Kittredge finds out, she will have her killed right away.
"You go and get the wing off the minister's daughter's hat, Mint,directed Jason firmly.

Minty worked with trembling fingers in the chilly seclusion of the
spare chamber, but she made a neat package. And she stuck on to the
hat in place of the wing some feathers from the white rooster.

There was an awful moment as Uncle and Aunt Piper were leaving.

"Just let me see whether he's got a real handsome wing," said Aunt
Kittredge, taking the package which Minty had put into Aunt Piper's
hand.

"Malachi is in considerable of a hurry, and they've done it up so
nice," said Aunt Piper. "There! I 'most forgot my sauce dishes, and
Sabriny's going to have company to-morrow!
Minty drew a long breath of relief as the carriage disappeared down
the lane, and Jason privately confided to her his opinion that she was
"an orfle smart girl.
There was another dreadful moment when the minister's daughter went
home. They had played games until a very late hour, for Corinna, and
she dressed so hurriedly that she did not observe that anything had
happened to her hat, but as she went down the garden walk Jason and
Minty saw in the moonlight the rooster's feathers blowing from it.

The next morning, in the privacy afforded by the great woodpile, to
which Jason had gone to chop his daily stint, the children debated the
advisability of committing the white turkey to the care of Lot Rankin,
who lived with his widowed mother on the edge of the woods.

"It's hard to get a chance to feed her," said Jason, "and she may
squawk.
"Lot Rankin may tell," suggested Minty. And she heaved a great sigh.
Conspiracy came hard to Minty.

Just then the voice of the new minister's daughter came to their ears.
She was talking with Aunt Kittredge on the other side of the woodpile.

"There was a high wind last night when I went home, and I suppose it
blew away. I am very sorry to lose it, because it was so pretty, and
it was a present, too," she said.

"Maybe the children have found it; they're round everywhere," said
Aunt Kittredge. And then she called shrilly to Jason.

Minty shrank down in a little heap behind a huge log as Jason stepped
bravely out from behind the woodpile, and answered promptly that he
had not seen the gull's wing. That was literally true; but how _she_
was going to answer, Minty did not know.

It was so great a relief that tears sprang to Minty's eyes when, after
a little more conversation, the minister's daughter went away. Aunt
Kittredge had taken it for granted that, as she remarked, "if one of
them young ones didn't know anything about it the other didn't.
Minty felt her burden of guilt to be greater than she could bear. And
there was no way in which she could earn money enough to buy the
minister's daughter a new feather until berries were ripe and the
weeds grew in old Mrs. Jackman's garden. Minty racked her brains to
think of something she could give the minister's daughter to ease her
troubled conscience. There was her Bunker Hill monument, made of
shells, her most precious treasure; she would gladly have parted with
even that, but it stood upon the table in the parlour, and Aunt
Kittredge would discover so soon that it had gone. And Aunt Kittredge
was quite capable of asking the minister's daughter to return it.
Minty felt, despairingly, that this atonement was impossible.

But suddenly a bright idea struck her. The feather on her summer
Sunday hat! It was blue--it had been white originally, but Aunt
Kittredge had thriftily had it dyed when it became soiled. Blue would
be very becoming to the minister's daughter, and perhaps she would
like it as well as her gull's wing. There was another sly visit to the
chilly spare chamber. Minty took the summer Sunday hat from its
bandbox in the closet, and carefully abstracted the blue feather. It
was slightly faded, and there were some traces of the wetting it had
received in a thunderstorm in spite of the handkerchief which Aunt
Kittredge carefully pinned over it; but Minty thought it still a very
beautiful feather. She put it into a little pasteboard box, wrote the
minister's daughter's name on it, placed it on her doorstep at dusk,
rang the bell, and ran away.

It was nearly a week before she could find this opportunity to present
the feather, for Aunt Kittredge didn't allow her to go out after dark;
and in all that time they had not been able to negotiate with Lot
Rankin, for Lot had the mumps on both sides at once, and could not be
seen. But the very next day after the minister's daughter received her
feather--as if things were all coming right, thought Minty
hopefully--Uncle Kittredge sent her down to Lot Rankin's to find out
when he would be strong enough to help Cyrus in the logging camp; and
Jason gave her many charges concerning the contract she was to make
with Lot. But as she was going out of the house, there stood the
minister's daughter in the doorway, talking with Aunt Kittredge.

"I shouldn't have known where it came from if Miss Plympton, the
milliner, hadn't happened to come in," the young girl was saying. "She
said at once, 'It's Minty Kittredge's feather. I had it dyed for her
last summer, and there's the little tag from the dye-house on it now.'
I can't think why she sent it to me.
Aunt Kittredge turned to the shrinking figure behind her, holding the
blue feather accusingly in her hand.

"Araminta Kittredge, what does this mean?" she demanded sternly.

"I--I--she felt so bad about her gull's wing, and--and--" A rising sob
fairly choked Minty.

"Please don't scold her. I'm sure she can explain," pleaded the
minister's daughter.

"It's my duty to find out just what this means," said Aunt Kittredge
severely. "I never heard of a child doing such a high-handed thing!
You can do your errand now, because your uncle wants you to, but when
you come back I shall have a settlement with you.
Poor Minty! She ran fast, never looking back, although the minister's
daughter called to her in kindliest tones.

There was no hope of keeping a secret from Aunt Kittredge when once
she had discovered that there was one. The only chance of saving
Priscilla's life lay in persuading Lot Rankin to care for and conceal
her.

But, alas! she found that Lot was not to be persuaded. He was going
into the woods to work, and his mother was "set against turkeys.Moreover, she was "so lonesome most of the time that when folks _did_
come along she told 'em all she knew.
Jason, who had been very anxious, met her at the corner. Perhaps it
was not to be wondered at that Jason was somewhat cross and
unreasonable. He said only a girl would be so foolish as to send that
feather to the minister's daughter. Girls were all silly, even those
who had high foreheads, and he would never trust one again. He hoped
she was going to have sense enough not to tell, no matter what Aunt
Kittredge did.

Poor Minty felt herself to be quite unequal to resisting Aunt
Kittredge, but she swallowed a lump in her throat and said firmly that
she would try to have sense enough.

As they passed the blacksmith's shop, Liphlet, Uncle Piper's man,
called out to them: "Mebbe I shan't have time to go up to your house.
The blacksmith is sick, so I had to come over here to get the mare
shod, and I wish you'd tell your aunt that Sabriny says 'twan't no
turkey's wing that she sent her: 'twas some kind of a sea-bird's wing,
and it come off of somebody's bunnit, and she's a-goin' to fetch it
back!
Minty and Jason answered not a word, but as they went on they looked
at each other despairingly.

"We should have been found out anyway," said Minty.

Her pitifully white face seemed to touch Jason and arouse a spark of
manly courage in his bosom.

"I'll stand by you, Mint, feather and all. You can't help being a
girl," he said magnanimously. "And I won't run away to be a cowboy
like Hiram Trickey.
Minty gave him a little grateful glance, but she could not speak. It
did not seem so dreadful now about Hiram Trickey. She wished that a
girl could run away to be a cowboy.

As they slowly and dejectedly drew near the house, they saw a horse
and a farm wagon at the door, and through the window they discovered
that Uncle and Aunt Kittredge, Clorinda, and Cyrus were all in the
kitchen. There was a visitor. Here was at least a slight reprieve.
They went around through the woodshed; it seemed advisable to approach
Aunt Kittredge with caution, even in the presence of a visitor.

"Well, I must say I'm consid'able disappointed," the visitor was
saying, as they softly opened the door. He was a bluff, burly man, who
sat with his tall whip between his knees. "I ought to 'a' stopped when
I see her out there top of the stone wall the last time I come by--the
handsomest turkey cretur I ever did see, and I've been in the poultry
business this twenty years. I knew in a minute she belonged to that
breed that old Mis' Joskins had; she fetched 'em from York State. She
moved away before I knew it, and carried 'em all with her.
"I bought some eggs of her, and 'most all of 'em hatched, but that
white turkey was the only one that lived," said Aunt Kittredge. "I
declare if I'd known she was anything more'n common, and worthy of
havin' her picture in a book--
"You'd ought to have known it, Maria!" said Uncle Kittredge testily.
"I wa'n't for havin' her killed, and you'd ought to have heard to me!
"I was calc'latin' to hev her picter right in the front of my new
poultry book," continued the visitor, whom the children now recognized
as the distinguished poultry dealer of North Edom for whom Cyrus had
once worked. "And I was going to have printed under it, 'From the farm
of Abner Kittredge, Esq., Corinna.' Be kind of a boom for you 'n'
Corinna, too--see? And if you didn't want to sell her right out, I
was calc'latin' to make you a handsome offer for all the eggs she
laid.
"There! Now you see what you've done, Maria! I declare I wouldn't
gredge givin' a twenty dollar bill to fetch that white turkey back!exclaimed Uncle Kittredge.

"Oh, oh! Uncle Kittredge!" Minty broke away from Jason, who would have
held her back, not feeling sure that it was quite time to speak, and
rushed into the room. "You needn't give twenty dollars! Priscilla is
down in the little shanty in the logging wood! We saved her--Jason and
I--and we bought a turkey of Jonas Hicks instead. I paid with my own
money, Aunt Kittredge! And then I--I took the gull's wing off the
minister's daughter's hat to send to Sabriny, and--and so that's why I
sent her the blue feather, and--and Sabriny's going to send the gull's
wing back--
"Jason, you go and fetch that turkey home!" said Uncle Kittredge.
"And, Maria, don't you blame them children one mite!
"I never heard of such high-handed doin's!" gasped Aunt Kittredge.

"I expect I shall have to send you children each a copy of my book
with the picter of that turkey in it," said the poultry dealer. "And
maybe the boy and I can make kind of a contract about eggs and
chickens.
The minister's daughter wore her gull's wing to church the next
Sunday, and she privately confided to Minty that she "didn't blame her
one bit." Aunt Kittredge looked at Minty somewhat severely for
several days but only as she looked at her when she turned around in
church or fidgeted in the long prayer. And after the poultry book came
out with Priscilla's photograph as a frontispiece, and people began to
make pilgrimages to the Red Hill farm to see the poultry, she was
heard to say several times that "it was wonderful to see how a smart
boy like Jason could make turkey raising pay," and that "as for Minty,
she always knew that high forehead of hers wasn't for nothing.