 A good old-fashioned story for the older boys and girls to
 read on the Sunday before Thanksgiving Day.


The Master of the Harvest walked by the side of his cornfields in the
early year, and a cloud was over his face, for there had been no rain
for several weeks, and the earth was hard from the parching of the
cold east winds, and the young wheat had not been able to spring up.



So, as he looked over the long ridges that lay stretched in rows
before him, he was vexed, and began to grumble, and say, "The harvest
would be backward, and all things would go wrong." At the mere thought
of which he frowned more and more, and uttered words of complaint
against the heavens, because there was no rain; against the earth,
because it was so dry and unyielding; against the corn, because it had
not sprung up.

And the man's discontent was whispered all over the field, and all
along the long ridges where the corn seeds lay; and when it reached
them they murmured out, "How cruel to complain! Are we not doing our
best? Have we let one drop of moisture pass by unused, one moment of
warmth come to us in vain? Have we not seized on every chance, and
striven every day to be ready for the hour of breaking forth? Are we
idle? Are we obstinate? Are we indifferent? Shall we not be found
waiting and watching? How cruel to complain!
Of all this, however, the Master of the Harvest heard nothing, so the
gloom did not pass away from his face. On the contrary, he took it
with him into his comfortable home, and repeated to his wife the dark
words that all things were going wrong; that the drought would ruin
the harvest, for the corn was not yet sprung.

And still thinking thus, he laid his head on his pillow, and presently
fell asleep.

But his wife sat up for a while by the bedside, and opened her Bible,
and read, "The harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers are
the angels.
Then she wrote this text in pencil on the flyleaf at the end of the
book, and after it the date of the day, and after the date the words,
"Lord, the husbandman, Thou waitest for the precious fruit Thou hast
sown, and hast long patience for it! Amen, O Lord, Amen!
After which the good woman knelt down to pray, and as she prayed she
wept, for she knew that she was very ill.

But what she prayed that night was heard only in heaven.

And so a few days passed on as before, and the house was gloomy with
the discontent of its master; but at last one evening the wind
changed, the sky became heavy with clouds, and before midnight there
was rain all over the land; and when the Master of the Harvest came in
next morning, wet from his early walk by the cornfields, he said it
was well it had come at last, and that, at last, the corn had sprung
up.

On which his wife looked at him with a smile, and said, "How often
things came right, about which one had been anxious and disturbed." To
which her husband made no answer, but turned away and spoke of
something else.

Meantime, the corn seeds had been found ready and waiting when the
hour came, and the young sprouts burst out at once; and very soon all
along the long ridges were to be seen rows of tender blades, tinting
the whole field with a delicate green. And day by day the Master of
the Harvest saw them and was satisfied; but because he was satisfied,
and his anxiety was gone, he spoke of other things, and forgot to
rejoice.

And a murmur arose among them: "Should not the Master have welcomed us
to life? He was angry but lately, because the seed he had sown had not
yet brought forth; now that it has brought forth, why is he not glad?
What more does he want? Have we not done our best? Are we not doing it
minute by minute, hour by hour, day by day? From the morning and
evening dews, from the glow of the midday sun, from the juices of the
earth, from the breezes which freshen the air, even from clouds and
rain, are we not taking in food and strength, warmth and life,
refreshment and joy; so that one day the valleys may laugh and sing,
because the good seed hath brought forth abundantly? Why does he not
rejoice?
As before, however, of all they said the Master of the Harvest heard
nothing; and it never struck him to think of the young corn blades'
struggling life. Nay, once, when his wife asked him if the wheat was
doing well, he answered, "Very fairly," and nothing more. But she
then, because the evening was fine and the fairer weather had revived
her failing powers, said she would walk out by the cornfields herself.

And so it came to pass that they went out together. And together they
looked all along the long green ridges of wheat, and watched the
blades as they quivered and glistened in the breeze which sprang up
with the setting sun. Together they walked, together they looked;
looking at the same things and with the same human eyes; even as they
had walked, and looked, and lived together for years, but with a world
dividing their hearts; and what was ever to unite them?

Even then, as they moved along, she murmured half aloud, half to
herself, thinking of the anxiety that had passed away: "Thou visitest
the earth, and blessest it; thou makest it very plenteous.
To which he answered, if answer it may be called, "Why are you always
so gloomy? Why should Scripture be quoted about such common things?
And she looked in his face and smiled, but did not speak; and he
could not read the smile, for the life of her heart was as hidden to
him as the life of the corn blades in the field.

And so they went home together, no more being said by either; for, as
she turned round, the sight of the setting sun and of the young
freshly growing wheat blades brought tears into her eyes.

_She_ might never see the harvest upon earth again; for her that other
was at hand, whereof the reapers were to be angels.

And when she opened her Bible that night she wrote on the flyleaf the
text she had quoted to her husband, and after the text the date of the
day, and after the date the words, "Bless me, even me also, oh, my
Father, that I may bring forth fruit with patience!
Very peaceful were the next few weeks that followed, for all nature
seemed to rejoice in the weather, and the corn blades shot up till
they were nearly two feet high, and about them the Master of the
Harvest had no complaints to make.

But at the end of that time, behold, the earth began to be hard and
dry again, for once more rain was wanted; and by degrees the growing
plants failed for want of moisture and nourishment, and lost power and
colour, and became weak and yellow in hue. And once more the
husbandmen began to fear and tremble, and once more the brow of the
Master of the Harvest was over-clouded with angry apprehension.

And as the man got more and more anxious about the fate of his crops,
he grew more and more irritable and distrustful, and railed as before,
only louder now, against the heavens because there was no rain;
against the earth because it lacked moisture; against the corn plants
because they had waxed feeble.

Nay, once, when his sick wife reproved him gently, praying him to
remember how his fears had been turned to joy before, he reproached
her in his turn for sitting in the house and pretending to judge of
what she could know nothing about, and bade her come out and see for
herself how all things were working together for ill.

And although he spoke it in bitter jest, and she was very ill, she
said she would go, and went.

So once more they walked out together, and once more looked over the
cornfields; but when he stretched out his arm and pointed to the long
ridges of blades, and she saw them shrunken and faded in hue, her
heart was grieved within her, and she turned aside and wept over them.

Nevertheless, she said she durst not cease from hope, since an hour
might renew the face of the earth, if God so willed; neither should
she dare to complain, _even the harvest were to fail_. At which words
the Master of the Harvest stopped short, amazed, to look at his wife,
for her soul was growing stronger as her body grew weaker, and she
dared to say things now which she would have had no courage to utter
before.

But of all this he knew nothing, and what he thought, as he listened,
was that she was as weak in mind as in body; and what he said was that
a man must be an idiot who would not complain when he saw the bread
taken from under his very eyes!

And his murmurings and her tears sent a shudder all along the long
ridges of sickly corn blades, and they asked one of another, "Why does
he murmur? and, Why does she weep? Are we not doing all we can? Do we
slumber or sleep, and let opportunities pass by unused? Are we not
watching and waiting against the times of refreshing? Shall we not be
found ready at last? Why does he murmur? and, Why does she weep? Is
she, too, fading and waiting? Has she, too, a master who has lost
patience?
Meantime, when she opened her Bible that night, she wrote on the
flyleaf the text, "Wherefore should a man complain, a man for the
punishment of his sins?" and after the text the date of the day, and
after the date the words, "Thou dost turn Thy face from us, and we are
troubled; but, Lord, how long, how long?
And by and by came on the long-delayed times of refreshing, but so
slowly and imperfectly that the change in the corn could scarcely be
detected for a while. Nevertheless, it told at last, and stems
struggled up among the blades, and burst forth into flowers, which
gradually ripened into ears of grain. But a struggle it had been, and
continued to be, for the measure of moisture was scant, and the due
amount of warmth in the air was wanting. Nevertheless, by struggling
and effort the young wheat advanced, little by little, in growth;
preparing itself, minute by minute, hour by hour, day by day, as best
it could, for the great day of the harvest. As best it could! Would
the Master of the Harvest ask more? Alas! he had still something to
find fault with, for when he looked at the ears and saw that they were
small and poor, he grumbled, and said the yield would be less than it
ought to be, and the harvest would be bad.

And as more weeks went on, and the same weather continued, and the
progress was very, very slow, he spoke out of his vexation to his wife
at home, to his friends at the market, and to the husbandmen who
passed by and talked with him about the crops.

And the voice of his discontent was breathed over the cornfield, all
along the long ridges where the plants were labouring, and waiting,
and watching. And they shuddered and murmured: "How cruel to complain!
Had we been idle, had we been negligent, had we been indifferent, we
might have passed away without bearing fruit at all. How cruel to
complain!
But of all this the Master of the Harvest heard nothing, so he did not
cease to complain.

Meantime, another week or two went on, and people as they glanced over
the land wished that a few good rainy days would come and do their
work decidedly, so that the corn ears might fill. And behold, while
the wish was yet on their lips, the sky became charged with clouds,
darkness spread over the country, a wild wind rose, and the growling
of thunder announced a storm. And such a storm! People hid from it in
cellars and closets and dark corners, as if now, for the first time,
they believed in a God, and were trembling at the new-found fact; as
if they could never discover Him in His sunshine and blessings, but
only thus in His tempests and wrath.

And all along the long ridges of wheat plants drove the rain-laden
blast, and they bent down before it and rose up again, like the waves
of a labouring sea. Ears over ears they bowed down; ears above ears
they rose up. They bowed down as if they knew that to resist was
destruction; they rose up as if they had a hope beyond the storm. Only
here and there, where the whirlwinds were the strongest, they fell
down and could not lift themselves again. So the damage done was but
little, and the general good was great. But when the Master of the
Harvest saw here and there patches of overweighted corn yet dripping
from the thunder showers, he grew angry for them, and forgot to think
of the long ridges that stretched over his fields, where the corn ears
were swelling and rejoicing.

And he came in gloomy to his home, when his wife was hoping that now,
at last, all would be well; and when she looked at him the tumult of
her soul grew beyond control, and she knelt down before him as he sat
moody in his chair, and threw her arms round him, and cried out: "It
is of the Lord's mercies that we are not utterly consumed. Oh,
husband! pray for the corn and for me, that it may go well with us at
the last! Carry me upstairs!" And his anger was checked by fear, and
he carried her upstairs and laid her on the bed, and said it must be
the storm which had shaken her nerves. But whether he prayed for
either the corn or her that night she never knew.

And presently came a new distress: for when the days of rain had
accomplished their gracious work, and every one was satisfied, behold,
they did not cease. And as hitherto the cry had gone up for water on
the furrows, so now men's hearts failed them for fear lest it should
continue to overflowing, and lest mildew should set in upon the full,
rich ears, and the glorious crops should be lost.

And the Master of the Harvest walked out by his cornfields, his face
darker than ever. And he railed against the rain because it would not
cease; against the sun because it would not shine; against the wheat
because it might perish before the harvest.

"But why does he always and only complain?" moaned the corn plants, as
the new terror was breathed over the field. "Have we not done our best
from the first? And has not mercy been with us, sooner or later, all
along? When moisture was scant, and we throve but little, why did he
not rejoice over that little, and wait, as we did, for more? Now that
abundance has come, and we swell triumphant in strength and in hope,
why does he not share our joy in the present, and wait in trust, as we
do, for the future ripening change? Why does he always complain? Has
he himself some hard master, who would fain reap where he has not
sown, and gather where he has not strewed, and who has no pity for his
servants who strive?
But of all this the Master of the Harvest heard nothing. And when the
days of rain had rolled into weeks and the weeks into months, and the
autumn set in, and the corn still stood up green in the ridges, as if
it never meant to ripen at all, the boldest and most hopeful became
uneasy, and the Master of the Harvest despaired.

But his wife had risen no more from her bed, where she lay in sickness
and suffering, yet in patient trust, watching the sky through the
window that faced her pillow, looking for the relief that came at
last. For even at the eleventh hour, when hope seemed almost over, and
men had half learned to submit to their expected trial, the dark days
began to be varied by a few hours of sunshine; and though these passed
away, and the gloom and rain returned again, yet they also passed away
in their turn, and the sun shone out once more.

And the poor sick wife, as she watched, said to those around her that
the weather was gradually changing, and that all would come right at
last; and sighing a prayer that it might be so with herself also, she
had her Bible brought to the bed, and wrote in the flyleaf the text,
"Some thirty, some sixty, some an hundredfold"; and after the text the
date of the day, for on that day the sun had been shining steadily for
many hours. And after the date the words, "Unto whom much is given,
of him shall much be required; yet if Thou, Lord, be extreme to mark
iniquity, O Lord, who may stand?
And day by day, the hours of sunshine were more in number, and the
hours of rain and darkness fewer, and by degrees the green corn ears
ripened into yellow, and the yellow turned into gold, and the harvest
was ready, and the labourers not wanting. And the bursting corn broke
out into songs of rejoicing, and cried, "At least we have not waited
and watched in vain! Surely goodness and mercy have followed us all
the days of our life, and we are crowned with glory and honour. Where
is the Master of the Harvest, that he may claim his own with joy?
But the Master of the Harvest was bending over the bed of his dying
wife.

And she whispered that her Bible should be brought, and he brought it,
and she said, "Open it at the flyleaf at the end, and write, 'It is
sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it is sown in
dishonour, it is raised in glory; it is sown in weakness, it is raised
in power; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body!'And she bade him add the date of the day, and after the date of the
day, the words, "O Lord, in Thy mercy say of me--She hath done what
she could!" And then she laid her hand in his, and so fell asleep in
hope.

And the harvest of the earth was gathered into barns, and the
gathering-day of rejoicing was over, and the Master of it all sat
alone by his fireside, with his wife's Bible on his knee. And he read
the texts and the dates and the prayers, from the first day when the
corn seeds were held back by drought; and as he read a new heart
seemed to burst out within him from the old one--a heart which the
Lord of the other Harvest was making soft, and the springing whereof
He would bless.

And henceforth, in his going out and coming in from watching the
fruits of the earth, the texts and the dates and the prayers were ever
present in his mind, often rising to his lips; and he murmured and
complained no more, let the seasons be what they would and his fears
however great; for the thought of the late-sprung seed in his own dry
cold heart, and of the long suffering of Him who was Lord and Master
of all, was with him night and day. And more and more as he prayed for
help, that the weary struggle might be blessed, and the new-born
watching and waiting not be in vain, so more and more there came over
his spirit a yearning for that other harvest, where he and she who had
gone before might be gathered in together.

And thus--in one hope of their calling--the long-divided hearts were
united at last.
