 This is the real Indian fairy tale of the birth of
 Mon-daw-min. Readers of Longfellow will remember his
 treatment of the same subject in "Hiawatha.

In Times past, a poor Indian was living with his wife and children in
a beautiful part of the country. He was not only poor, but inexpert in
procuring food for his family, and his children were all too young to
give him assistance. Although poor, he was a man of a kind and
contented disposition. He was always thankful to the Great Spirit for
everything he received. The same disposition was inherited by his
eldest son, who had now arrived at the proper age to undertake the
ceremony of the Ke-ig-uish-im-o-win, or fast, to see what kind of a
spirit would be his guide and guardian through life. Wunzh, for this
was his name, had been an obedient boy from his infancy, and was of a
pensive, thoughtful, and mild disposition, so that he was beloved by
the whole family. As soon as the first indications of spring appeared,
they built him the customary little lodge at a retired spot, some
distance from their own, where he would not be disturbed during this
solemn rite. In the meantime he prepared himself, and immediately went
into it, and commenced his fast. The first few days he amused himself,
in the mornings, by walking in the woods and over the mountains,
examining the early plants and flowers, and in this way prepared
himself to enjoy his sleep, and at the same time stored his mind with
pleasant ideas for his dreams. While he rambled through the woods, he
felt a strong desire to know how the plants, herbs, and berries grew
without any aid from man, and why it was that some species were good
to eat and others possessed medicinal or poisonous juices. He recalled
these thoughts to mind after he became too languid to walk about, and
had confined himself strictly to the lodge; he wished he could dream
of something that would prove a benefit to his father and family, and
to all others. "True!" he thought, "the Great Spirit made all things,
and it is to him that we owe our lives. But could he not make it
easier for us to get our food than by hunting animals and taking fish?
I must try to find out this in my visions.


On the third day he became weak and faint, and kept his bed. He
fancied, while thus lying, that he saw a handsome young man coming
down from the sky and advancing toward him. He was richly and gayly
dressed, having on a great many garments of green and yellow colours,
but differing in their deeper or lighter shades. He had a plume of
waving feathers on his head, and all his motions were graceful.

"I am sent to you, my friend," said the celestial visitor, "by that
Great Spirit who made all things in the sky and on the earth. He has
seen and knows your motives in fasting. He sees that it is from a kind
and benevolent wish to do good to your people, and to procure a
benefit for them, and that you do not seek for strength in war or the
praise of warriors. I am sent to instruct you, and show you how you
can do your kindred good." He then told the young man to arise, and
prepare to wrestle with him, as it was only by this means that he
could hope to succeed in his wishes. Wunzh knew he was weak from
fasting, but he felt his courage rising in his heart, and immediately
got up, determined to die rather than fail. He commenced the trial,
and after a protracted effort was almost exhausted when the beautiful
stranger said, "My friend, it is enough for once; I will come again to
try you"; and, smiling on him, he ascended in the air in the same
direction from which he came. The next day the celestial visitor
reappeared at the same hour and renewed the trial. Wunzh felt that his
strength was even less than the day before, but the courage of his
mind seemed to increase in proportion as his body became weaker.
Seeing this, the stranger again spoke to him in the same words he used
before, adding, "To-morrow will be your last trial. Be strong, my
friend, for this is the only way you can overcome me, and obtain the
boon you seek." On the third day he again appeared at the same time
and renewed the struggle. The poor youth was very faint in body, but
grew stronger in mind at every contest, and was determined to prevail
or perish in the attempt. He exerted his utmost powers, and after the
contest had been continued the usual time, the stranger ceased his
efforts and declared himself conquered. For the first time he entered
the lodge, and sitting down beside the youth, he began to deliver his
instructions to him, telling him in what manner he should proceed to
take advantage of his victory.

"You have won your desires of the Great Spirit," said the stranger.
"You have wrestled manfully. To-morrow will be the seventh day of your
fasting, your father will give you food to strengthen you, and as it
is the last day of trial, you will prevail. I know this, and now tell
you what you must do to benefit your family and your tribe.
To-morrow," he repeated, "I shall meet you and wrestle with you for
the last time; and, as soon as you have prevailed against me, you will
strip off my garments and throw me down, clean the earth of roots and
weeds, make it soft, and bury me in the spot. When you have done this,
leave my body in the earth, and do not disturb it, but come
occasionally to visit the place, to see whether I have come to life,
and be careful never to let the grass or weeds grow on my grave. Once
a month cover me with fresh earth. If you follow my instructions, you
will accomplish your object of doing good to your fellow-creatures by
teaching them the knowledge I now teach you." He then shook him by the
hand and disappeared.

In the morning the youth's father came with some slight refreshments,
saying, "My son, you have fasted long enough. If the Great Spirit will
favour you, he will do it now. It is seven days since you have tasted
food, and you must not sacrifice your life. The Master of Life does
not require that." "My father," replied the youth, "wait till the sun
goes down. I have a particular reason for extending my fast to that
hour." "Very well," said the old man. "I shall wait till the hour
arrives, and you feel inclined to eat.
At the usual hour of the day the sky visitor returned, and the trial
of strength was renewed. Although the youth had not availed himself of
his father's offer of food, he felt that new strength had been given
to him, and that exertion had renewed his strength and fortified his
courage. He grasped his angelic antagonist with supernatural strength,
threw him down, took from him his beautiful garments and plume, and
finding him dead, immediately buried him on the spot, taking all the
precautions he had been told of, and being very confident, at the same
time, that his friend would again come to life. He then returned to
his father's lodge, and partook sparingly of the meal that had been
prepared for him. But he never for a moment forgot the grave of his
friend. He carefully visited it throughout the spring, and weeded out
the grass, and kept the ground in a soft and pliant state. Very soon
he saw the tops of the green plumes coming through the ground; and the
more careful he was to obey his instructions in keeping the ground in
order, the faster they grew. He was, however, careful to conceal the
exploit from his father. Days and weeks had passed in this way. The
summer was now drawing toward a close, when one day, after a long
absence in hunting, Wunzh invited his father to follow him to the
quiet and lonesome spot of his former fast. The lodge had been
removed, and the weeds kept from growing on the circle where it stood,
but in its place stood a tall and graceful plant, with bright coloured
silken hair, surmounted with nodding plumes and stately leaves, and
golden clusters on each side. "It is my friend," shouted the lad; "it
is the friend of all mankind. It is _Mondawmin_. We need no longer
rely on hunting alone; for, as long as this gift is cherished and
taken care of, the ground itself will give us a living." He then
pulled an ear. "See, my father," said he, "this is what I fasted for.
The Great Spirit has listened to my voice, and sent us something new,
and henceforth our people will not alone depend upon the chase or upon
the waters.
He then communicated to his father the instructions given him by the
stranger. He told him that the broad husks must be torn away, as he
had pulled off the garments in his wrestling; and having done this,
directed him how the ear must be held before the fire till the outer
skin became brown, while all the milk was retained in the grain. The
whole family then united in feast on the newly grown ears, expressing
gratitude to the Merciful Spirit who gave it. So corn came into the
world.
