Once upon a time there lived in a village a country girl, who was the
sweetest little creature that ever was seen; her mother naturally loved
her with excessive fondness, and her grandmother doted on her still
more. The good woman had made for her a pretty little red-coloured hood,
which so much became the little girl, that every one called her Little
Red Riding Hood.

One day her mother having made some cheesecakes, said to her, "Go, my
child, and see how your grandmother does, for I hear she is ill; carry
her some of these cakes, and a little pot of butter." Little Red Riding
Hood straight set out with a basket filled with the cakes and the pot of
butter, for her grandmother's house, which was in a village a little way
off the town that her mother lived in. As she was crossing a wood, which
lay in her road, she met a large wolf, which had a great mind to eat her
up, but dared not, for fear of some wood-cutters, who were at work near
them in the forest. Yet he spoke to her, and asked her whither she was
going. The little girl, who did not know the danger of talking to a
wolf, replied: "I am going to see my grandmamma, and carry these cakes
and a pot of butter." "Does she live far off?" said the wolf. "Oh yes!answered Little Red Riding Hood; "beyond the mill you see yonder, at the
first house in the village." "Well," said the wolf, "I will take this
way, and you take that, and see which will be there the soonest.
The wolf set out full speed, running as fast as he could, and taking the
nearest way, while the little girl took the longest; and as she went
along began to gather nuts, run after butterflies, and make nose-gays of
such flowers as she found within her reach. The wolf got to the dwelling
of the grandmother first, and knocked at the door. "Who is there?" said
some voice in the house. "It is your grandchild, Little Red Riding
Hood," said the wolf, speaking like the little girl as well as he could.
"I have brought you some cheesecakes, and a little pot of butter, that
mamma has sent you." The good old woman, who was ill in bed, called out,
"Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up." The wolf pulled the bobbin,
and the door went open. The wolf then jumped upon the poor old
grandmother, and ate her up in a moment, for it was three days since he
had tasted any food. The wolf then shut the door, and laid himself down
in the bed, and waited for Little Red Riding Hood, who very soon after
reached the house. Tap! tap! "Who is there?" cried he. She was at first
a little afraid at hearing the gruff voice of the wolf, but she thought
that perhaps her grandmother had got a cold, so she answered: "It is
your grandchild, Little Red Riding Hood. Mamma has sent you some
cheesecakes, and a little pot of butter." The wolf cried out in a softer
voice, "Pull the bobbin, and the latch will go up." Little Red Riding
Hood pulled the bobbin, and the door went open. When she came into the
room, the wolf hid himself under the bedclothes, and said to her, trying
all he could to speak in a feeble voice: "Put the basket on the stool,
my dear, and take off your clothes, and come into bed." Little Red
Riding Hood, who always used to do as she was told, straight undressed
herself, and stepped into bed; but she thought it strange to see how her
grandmother looked in her nightclothes, so she said to her: "Dear me,
grandmamma, what great arms you have got!" "They are so much the better
to hug you, my child," replied the wolf. "But grandmamma," said the
little girl, "what great ears you have got!" "They are so much the
better to hear you, my child," replied the wolf. "But then, grandmamma,
what great eyes you have got!" said the little girl. "They are so much
the better to see you, my child," replied the wolf. "And grandmamma,
what great teeth you have got!" said the little girl, who now began to
be rather afraid. "They are to eat you up," said the wolf; and saying
these words, the wicked creature fell upon Little Red Riding Hood, and
ate her up in a moment.
