The curate rode first on the mule , and with him rode Don Quixote and
the princess . The others , Cardenio , the barber , and Sancho Panza , 
followed on foot . 

And as they rode , Don Quixote said to the damsel: "Madam , let me
entreat your highness to lead the way that most pleaseth you . "

Before she could answer , the curate said: "Towards what kingdoms would
you travel ? Are you for your native land of Micomicon ? "

She , who knew very well what to answer , being no babe , replied: "Yes , 
sir , my way lies towards that kingdom . "

"If it be so , " said the curate , "you must pass through the village
where I dwell , and from thence your ladyship must take the road to
Carthagena , where you may embark . And , if you have a prosperous
journey , you may come within the space of nine years to the Lake
Meona , I mean Meolidas , which stands on this side of your highness's
kingdom some hundred days' journey or more . "

"You are mistaken , good sir , " said she , "for it is not yet fully two
years since I left there , and , though I never had fair weather , I have
arrived in time to see what I so longed for , the presence of the
renowned Don Quixote of the Mancha , whose glory was known to me as
soon as my foot touched the shores of Spain . "

"No more , " cried Don Quixote . "I cannot abide to hear myself praised , 
for I am a sworn enemy to flattery . And though I know what you speak
is but truth , yet it offends mine ears . And I can tell you this , at
least , that whether I have valour or not , I will use it in your
service , even to the loss of my life . But let me know , master curate , 
what has brought you here ? "

"You must know , then , " replied the curate , "that Master Nicholas , the
barber , and myself travelled towards Seville to recover certain sums
of money which a kinsman of mine in the Indies had sent me . And
passing yesterday through this way we were set upon by four robbers , 
who took everything that we had . And it is said about here , that those
who robbed us were certain galley slaves , who they say were set at
liberty , almost on this very spot , by a man so valiant that in spite
of the guard he released them all . And doubtless he must be out of his
wits , or else he must be as great a knave as they , to loose the wolf
among the sheep , and rebel against his king by taking from the galleys
their lawful prey . "

Sancho had told the curate of an adventure they had had with galley
slaves , and the curate spoke of it to see what Don Quixote would say . 
The knight , however , durst not confess his part in the adventure , but
rode on , changing colour at every word the curate spoke . 

When the curate had finished , Sancho burst out: "By my father , master
curate , he that did that deed was my master , and that not for want of
warning , for I told him beforehand that it was a sin to deliver them , 
and that they were great rogues who had been sent to the galleys to
punish them for their crimes . "

"You bottlehead ! " replied Don Quixote . "It is not the duty of
knights-errant to examine whether the afflicted , enslaved , and
oppressed whom they meet by the way are in sorrow for their own
default; they must relieve them because they are needy and in
distress , looking at their sorrow and not at their crimes . And if any
but the holy master curate shall find fault with me on this account , I
will tell him that he knows nought of knighthood , and that he lies in
his throat , and this I will make him know by the power of my sword . "

Dorothea , who was discreet enough to see they were carrying the jest
too far , now said: "Remember , sir knight , the boon you promised me , 
never to engage in any other adventure , be it ever so urgent , until
you have seen me righted . And had master curate known that it was the
mighty arm of Don Quixote that freed the galley slaves , I feel sure he
would have bit his tongue through ere he spoke words which might cause
you anger . "

"That I dare swear , " said the curate . 

"Madam , " replied Don Quixote , "I will hold my peace and keep my anger
to myself , and will ride on peaceably and quietly until I have done
the thing I promised . Tell me , therefore , without delay , what are your
troubles and on whom am I to take revenge . "

To this Dorothea replied: "Willingly will I do what you ask , so you
will give me your attention . "

At this Cardenio and the barber drew near to hear the witty Dorothea
tell her tale , and Sancho , who was as much deceived as his master , was
the most eager of all to listen . 

She , after settling herself in her saddle , began with a lively air to
speak as follows: "In the first place , I would have you know , 
gentlemen , that my name is--" Here she stopped a moment , for she had
forgotten what name the curate had given her . 

He , seeing her trouble , said quickly: "It is no wonder , great lady , 
that you hesitate to tell your misfortunes . Great sufferers often lose
their memory , so that they even forget their own names , as seems to
have happened to your ladyship , who has forgotten that she is called
the Princess Micomicona , heiress of the great Kingdom of Micomicon . "

"True , " said the damsel , "but let me proceed . The king , my father , 
was called Tinacrio the Sage , and was learned in the magic art . By
this he discovered that my mother , the Queen Xaramilla , would die
before him , and that I should soon afterwards be left an orphan . This
did not trouble him so much as the knowledge that a certain giant , 
called Pandafilando of the Sour Face , lord of a great island near our
border , when he should hear that I was an orphan , would pass over with
a mighty force into my kingdom and take it from me . My father warned
me that when this came to pass I should not stay to defend myself , and
so cause the slaughter of my people , but should at once set out for
Spain , where I should meet with a knight whose fame would then extend
through all that kingdom . His name , he said , should be Don Quixote , 
and he would be tall of stature , have a withered face , and on his
right side , a little under his left shoulder , he should have a tawny
spot with certain hairs like bristles . "

On hearing this , Don Quixote said: "Hold my horse , son Sancho , and
help me to strip , for I would know if I am the knight of whom the sage
king spoke . "

"There is no need , " said Sancho , "for I know that your worship has
such a mark near your backbone . "

"It is enough , " said Dorothea , "for among friends we must not be too
particular , and whether it is on your shoulder or your backbone is of
no importance . And , indeed , no sooner did I land in Osuna than I heard
of Don Quixote's fame , and felt sure that he was the man . "

"But how did you land in Osuna , madam , " asked Don Quixote , "seeing
that it is not a sea town ? "

"Sir , " said the curate , "the princess would say that she landed at
Malaga , and that Osuna was the first place wherein she heard tidings
of your worship . "

"That is so , " said Dorothea; "and now nothing remains but to guide you
to Pandafilando of the Sour Face , that I may see you slay him , and
once again enter into my kingdom . For all must succeed as the wise
Tinacrio , my father , has foretold , and if the knight of the prophecy , 
when he has killed the giant , so desires , then it will be my lot to
become his wife , and he will at once possess both me and my kingdom . "

"What thinkest thou of this , friend Sancho ? Did I not tell thee this
would come about ? Here we have a kingdom to command and a queen to
marry . "

When Sancho heard all this he jumped for joy , and running to Dorothea
stopped her mule , and asking her very humbly to give him her hand to
kiss , he kneeled down as a sign that he accepted her as his queen and
lady . 

All around could scarcely hide their laughter at the knight's madness
and the squire's simplicity , and when Dorothea promised Sancho to make
him a great lord , and Sancho gave her thanks , it roused their mirth
anew . 

"Madam , " continued Don Quixote , who appeared to be full of thought , "I
repeat all I have said , and make my vow anew , and when I have cut off
the head of Pandafilando I will put you in peaceable possession of
your kingdom , but since my memory and will are captive to another , it
is not possible for me to marry . "

So disgusted was Sancho with what he heard that he cried out in a
great rage: "Surely , Sir Don Quixote , your worship is not in your
right senses . Is it possible your worship can refuse to marry a
princess like this ? A poor chance have I of getting a countship if
your worship goes on like this , searching for mushrooms at the bottom
of the sea . Is my Lady Dulcinea more beautiful ? She cannot hold a
candle to her . Marry her ! Marry at once , and when you are king make me
a governor . "

Don Quixote , who heard such evil things spoken of his Lady Dulcinea , 
could not bear them any longer , and therefore , lifting up his lance , 
without speaking a word to Sancho , gave him two blows that brought him
to the earth , and if Dorothea had not called to the knight to spare
him , without doubt he would have taken his squire's life . 

"Think you , miserable villain , " cried Don Quixote , "that it is to be
all sinning on thy side and pardoning on mine ? Say , scoffer with the
viper's tongue , who dost thou think hath gained this kingdom and cut
off the head of this giant and made thee marquis--for all this I take
to be a thing as good as completed--unless it be the worth and valour
of Dulcinea using my arm as her instrument ? She fights in my person , 
and I live and breathe in her . From her I hold my life and being . O
villain , how ungrateful art thou that seest thyself raised from the
dust of the earth to be a nobleman , and speakest evil of her who gives
thee such honours ! "

Sancho was not too much hurt to hear what his master said . He jumped
up nimbly and ran behind Dorothea's palfrey , and from there said to
his master: "Tell me , your worship , if you are not going to marry this
great princess , how this kingdom will become yours , and how you can do
me any favours . Pray marry this queen now we have her here . I say
nothing against Lady Dulcinea's beauty , for I have never seen her . "

"How , thou wicked traitor , thou hast not seen her ! " cried Don
Quixote . "Didst thou not but now bring me a message from Her ? "

"I mean , " replied Sancho , "not seen her for long enough to judge of
her beauty , though , from what I did see , she appeared very lovely . "

"Ah ! " said Don Quixote , "then I do excuse thee , but have a care what
thou sayest , for , remember , the pitcher may go once too often to the
well . "

"No more of this , " said Dorothea . "Run Sancho , kiss your master's
hand , and ask his pardon . Henceforth speak no evil of the Lady
Dulcinea , and trust that fortune may find you an estate where you may
live like a prince . "

Sancho went up hanging his head and asked his lord's hand , which he
gave him with a grave air , and , after he had kissed it , the knight
gave him his blessing , and no more was said about it . 

While this was passing , they saw coming along the road on which they
were a man riding upon an ass , and when he drew near he seemed to be a
gipsy . 

But Sancho Panza , whenever he met with any asses , followed them with
his eyes and his heart , and he had hardly caught sight of the man when
he knew him to be an escaped robber , Gines of Passamonte , and the ass
to be none other than his beloved Dapple . 

Gines had disguised himself as a gipsy , but Sancho knew him , and
called out in a loud voice: "Ah ! thief Gines , give up my jewel , let go
my life , give up mine ass , give up the comfort of my home . Fly , 
scoundrel ! Begone , thief ! Give back what is none of thine . "

He need not have used so many words , for Gines leaped off at the first
and raced away from them all as fast as his legs could carry him . 

Sancho then ran up to Dapple , and , embracing him , cried: "How hast
thou been cared for , my darling and treasure , Dapple of mine eyes , my
sweet companion ? " With this he stroked and kissed him as if he had
been a human being . But the ass held his peace , and allowed Sancho to
kiss and cherish him without answering a word . 




SANCHO PANZA'S STORY OF HIS VISIT TO THE LADY DULCINEA

Retold by Judge Parry


"Friend Sancho , " said Don Quixote , "let us bury all our differences , 
and tell me when , how , and where didst thou find Dulcinea . What was
she doing ? What saidst thou to her ? What answer made she ? How did she
look when she read my letter ? Who copied it for thee ? Tell me all , 
without adding to it or lying , for I would know everything . "

"Master , " replied Sancho , "if I must speak the truth , nobody copied
out the letter , for I carried no letter at all . "

"Thou sayest true , " said Don Quixote , "for I found the pocket-book , 
wherein it was written , two days after thy departure , and I did expect
that thou wouldst return for it . "

"I had done so , " said Sancho , "if I had not carried it in my memory
when you read it to me , so that I could say it to a parish clerk , who
copied it out of my head , word for word , so exactly that he said that
in all the days of his life he had never read such a pretty letter . "

"And hast thou it still by heart , Sancho ? " asked Don Quixote . 

"No , sir , for after I gave it , seeing that it was to be of no more
use , I let myself forget it . If I remember , it began , _Scrubby Queen , 
Sovereign Lady_ , and the ending--_yours till death , the Knight of the
Rueful Countenance_--but between these things I put in three hundred
_hearts_ , and _loves_ , and _dear eyes_ . "

"All this I like to hear , therefore say on , " said Don Quixote . "Thou
didst arrive; and what was the Queen of Beauty doing then ? I daresay
thou foundest her threading pearls or embroidering some curious device
with golden threads for this her captive knight . "

"No , that I did not , " said Sancho , "but winnowing two bushels of wheat
in the yard of her house . "

"Why , then , " said Don Quixote , "thou mayest reckon that each grain of
wheat was a pearl , seeing they were touched by her hands . But tell me , 
when thou didst deliver my letter , did she kiss it ? Did she use any
ceremony worthy of such a letter ? Or what did she ? "

"When I went to give it to her , " said Sancho , "she was all in a bustle
with a good lot of wheat in her sieve , and said to me: 'Lay down that
letter there on the sack , for I cannot read it until I have winnowed
all that is here . '"

"O discreet lady ! " said Don Quixote; "she must have done that , so that
she might read and enjoy it at leisure . Go on , then , Sancho , and tell
all she said about me , and what thou saidst to her . "

"She asked me nothing , " replied the squire , "but I told her the state
which I left you in for her sake , doing penance , and I told her how
you slept on the ground and never combed your beard , but spent your
time weeping and cursing your fortune . "

"There thou saidst ill , " said Don Quixote , "for I do not curse my
fortune , but rather bless it , seeing that it hath made me worthy to
merit the love of so beautiful a lady as Dulcinea of Toboso . But tell
me , after she had sifted her corn and sent it to the mill , did she
then read my letter ? "

"The letter , " replied Sancho , "she did never read , for she said she
could neither read nor write , and therefore she tore it into small
pieces , and would allow no one to read it lest the whole village might
know her secrets . Lastly , she told me that I was to say to your
worship that she kissed your hands , and that she had a greater desire
to see you than to write to you . Therefore she begged , as you loved
her , that you should quit these bushes and brambles , and leave off
these mad pranks , and set out for Toboso , for she had a great longing
to see your worship . She laughed a good deal when I told her they
called your worship the Knight of the Rueful Countenance . I asked her
whether the beaten Biscayan came there . She said yes , and that he was
a very good fellow . I asked also after the galley slaves you sent; but
she told me that she had seen none of them as yet . "

"All goes well , then , " said Don Quixote; "but tell me , what jewel did
she bestow on thee at thy departure for reward of the tidings thou
hadst brought ? For it is a usual and ancient custom among
knights-errant and their ladies to give to their squires , damsels , or
dwarfs who bring good tidings , some rich jewel as a reward for their
welcome news . "

"It may well be , " replied Sancho; "and I think it was a most excellent
custom , but I doubt if it exists nowadays , for it would seem to be the
manner of our age only to give a piece of bread and cheese; for this
was all that my Lady Dulcinea bestowed on me when I took my leave , 
and , by the way , the cheese was made of sheep's milk . "

"She is marvellous liberal , " said the knight; "and if she gave thee
not a jewel of gold , it was doubtless because she had none then about
her . But that will be put right some day . Knowest thou , Sancho , at
what I am astonished ? It is at thy sudden return , for it seems to me
thou wast gone and hast come back again in the air , for thou hast been
away but a little more than three days , although Toboso is more than
thirty leagues from hence . Therefore I do believe that the wise
enchanter , who takes care of my affairs and is my friend , must have
helped thee to travel without thy being aware of it . For there are
sages that take up a knight-errant sleeping in his bed , and , without
knowing how or in what manner , he awakes the next day more than a
thousand leagues from the place where he fell asleep . For otherwise
knights-errant could not help one another in perils as they do
now . For it may be that one is fighting in the mountains of Armenia
with some dragon or fierce serpent , and is at the point of death , and , 
just when he least expects it , he sees on a cloud , or in a chariot of
fire , some other knight , his friend , who a little before was in
England , who helps him and delivers him from danger . And all this is
done by the craft and wisdom of those sage enchanters who take care of
valorous knights . But , leaving all this apart , what dost thou think I
should do about my lady's commands to go and see her ? "

"Tell me , good your worship , " replied Sancho , "do you intend to
journey to Toboso and lose so rich and noble a prize as this princess
we have just met at the inn ? Peace ! take my advice and marry her in
the first village that hath a parish priest , or let the curate do it , 
for he is here , and remember the old saying , 'A bird in the hand is
worth two in the bush . '"

"Look you , Sancho , " said his master , "if you counsel me to marry , to
the end that I may be king when I have slain the giant and be able to
give you an island , know that I can do that without marrying , for I
will make it a condition that upon conquering this monster they shall
give me a portion of the kingdom , although I marry not the princess , 
and this I will bestow upon thee . "

"Let it be so , then , " said Sancho . "And trouble not your mind , I pray
you , to go and see the Lady Dulcinea at this moment , but go away and
kill the giant and let us finish off this job , for I believe it will
prove of great honour and greater profit . "

"I believe , Sancho , " said Don Quixote , "that thou art in the right , 
and I will follow thy advice in going first with the princess rather
than visiting Dulcinea . "


