Many , many years ago in the far-off land of Hellas , which we call
Greece , lived a happy young couple whose names were Alcmene and
Amphitryon . Now Amphitryon , the husband , owned many herds of cattle . 
So also the father of Alcmene , who was King of Mycenae , owned many . 

All these cattle grazing together and watering at the same springs
became united in one herd . And this was the cause of much trouble , 
for Amphitryon fell to quarreling with the father of his wife about
his portion of the herd . At last he slew his father-in-law , and from
that day he fled his old home at Mycenae . 

Alcmene went with her husband and the young couple settled at
Thebes , where were born to them two boys--twins--which were later
named Hercules and Iphicles . 

From the child ' s very birth Zeus , the King of all heaven that is the
air and clouds , and the father of gods and men--from the boy ' s very
birth Zeus loved Hercules . But when Hera , wife of Zeus , who shared
his honours , saw this love she was angry . Especially she was angry
because Zeus foretold that Hercules should become the greatest of
men . 

Therefore one night , when the two babies were but eight months old , 
Hera sent two huge serpents to destroy them . The children were
asleep in the great shield of brass which Amphitryon carried in
battle for his defence . It was a good bed , for it was round and
curved toward the centre , and filled with soft blankets which
Alcmene and the maids of the house had woven at their looms . Forward
toward this shield the huge snakes were creeping , and just as they
lifted their open mouths above the rim , and were making ready to
seize them , the twins opened their eyes . Iphicles screamed with
fright . His cries wakened their mother , Alcmene , who called in a
loud voice for help . But before Amphitryon and the men of the
household could draw their swords and rush to the rescue , the baby
Hercules , sitting up in the shield unterrified and seizing a serpent
in each hand , had choked and strangled them till they died . 

From his early years Hercules was instructed in the learning of his
time . Castor , the most experienced charioteer of his day , taught
him , Eurytus also , how to shoot with a bow and arrows; Linus how to
play upon the lyre; and Eumolpus , grandson of the North Wind , 
drilled him in singing . Thus time passed to his eighteenth year
when , so great already had become his strength and knowledge , he
killed a fierce lion which had preyed upon the flocks of Amphitryon
while they were grazing on Mount Cithaeron , and which had in fact
laid waste many a fat farm of the surrounding country . 

But the anger of Hera still followed Hercules , and the goddess sent
upon him a madness . In this craze the hero did many unhappy deeds . 
For punishment and in expiation he condemned himself to exile , and
at last he went to the great shrine of the god Apollo at Delphi to
ask whither he should go and where settle . The Pythia , or priestess
in the temple , desired him to settle at Tiryns , to serve as bondman
to Eurystheus , who ruled at Mycenae as King , and to perform the
great labours which Eurystheus should impose upon him . When these
tasks were all accomplished , the inspired priestess added , Hercules
should be numbered among the immortal gods . 

THE FIRST LABOUR--WRESTLING WITH THE NEMEAN LION

The first task which Eurystheus required of Hercules was to bring
him the skin of a lion which no arrow nor other weapon could wound , 
and which had long been a terror to the good people who lived in
Nemea . Hercules set forth armed with bow and quiver , but paused in
the outer wood of Nemea long enough to cut himself his famous club . 
There too he fell in with an honest countryman who pledged him to
make a sacrifice to Zeus , the saviour , if he , Hercules , should
return victorious; but if he were slain by the monstrous lion , then
the countryman should make the sacrifice a funeral offering to
himself as a hero . 

So Hercules proceeded , far into a dense wood , deserted because all
people feared the fierce beast it protected . On he went till after
many days he sighted the lion at rest near the cave which was its
den . Standing behind a tree of great girth , Hercules fitted and let
fly an arrow . It struck and glanced , leaving the animal unharmed . 
Then he tried another shot , aiming at the heart . Again the arrow
failed . But the lion was by this time roused , and his eyes shot
fiery glances , and the heavy roar from his throat made the woods
most horribly resound . Then the devoted Hercules seized his heavy
wooden club , and rushing forward drove the lion by the suddenness
and fierceness of his assault into his den . But the den had two
entrances . Against one Hercules rolled huge stones , and entering the
cave by the other he grasped the lion ' s throat with both hands , and
thus held him struggling and gasping for breath till he lay at his
feet dead . 

Hercules swung the mighty bulk upon his shoulders and proceeded to
seek the countryman with whom his pledge stood . So great had been
his journey , and so hard his search , that he did not find the good
man till the last of the thirty days . There he stood just on the
point of offering a sheep to Hercules , supposing him dead . Together
they sacrificed the sheep to Zeus instead , and Hercules , vigorous
and victorious , bore the mighty lion ' s body to Eurystheus at
Mycenae . 

Entering the place and throwing the carcass down before the king , 
Hercules so terrified Eurystheus by this token of his wonderful
strength that the King forbade him ever again to enter the city . 
Indeed some say that the terror of Eurystheus was so great that he
had a jar or vessel of brass secretly constructed underground which
he might use as a safe retreat in case of danger . This  " jar " was
probably a chamber and its walls covered within with plates of
brass . For now in our own day is seen there at Mycenae a room under
the earth , and the nails which fastened the brass plates to the wall
still remain . Ever after the conquest of this lion Hercules clothed
himself with the skin . 

THE SECOND LABOUR--DESTROYING THE LERNEAN HYDRA

The second task of Hercules was to destroy a hydra or water snake
which dwelt in the marsh of Lerna , a small lake near Mycenae . The
body of this snake was large and from its body sprang nine heads . 
Eight of these heads were mortal , but the ninth head was undying . 

Hercules stepped into his chariot and his dear nephew Iolaus , who
was permitted by the Delphic priestess to drive for him , took up the
reins . The way to Lerna was pleasant . In spring-time crocuses and
hyacinths sprang by the roadside , and in early summer the
nightingales sang in the olive groves , vineyard and forest . That so
great and horrible a monster could be near ! 

When Hercules and Iolaus came to Lerna they drew close to ground
rising near a spring , and Hercules dismounting and searching found
the very hole into which the hydra had retired . Into this he shot
fiery arrows . The arrows discomforting the snake it crawled forth
and , darting at him furiously , endeavoured to twine itself about his
legs . The hero began then to wield his mighty club . He crushed head
after head upon the snake ' s body , but for every one crushed two
sprang in its place . 

At length the hydra had coiled so firmly round one leg , that
Hercules could not move an inch from the spot . And now an enormous
crab came from the water out of friendship for the hydra , and that
too crept up to Hercules and , seizing his foot , painfully wounded
him . 

Swinging his club with heroic vigor Hercules beat the crab to death . 
Then he called to Iolaus to fire a little grove of trees near by . 
Iolaus at once set the fire , and when the saplings were well aflame
he seized them and , standing by the hero , as fast as Hercules cut
off a head of the hydra he seared the neck with a flaming brand . The
searing prevented the heads from growing again . When all the eight
mortal heads had thus been dispatched Hercules struck off the one
said to be immortal and buried it in the roadway , setting a heavy
stone above . The body of the hydra he cut up and dipped his arrows
in the gall , which was so full of poison that the least scratch from
such an arrow would bring certain death . 

Eurystheus received the news of the destruction of the water snake
with bad grace . He claimed that Hercules had not destroyed the
monster alone , but only with the assistance of Iolaus . All the
people , however , rejoiced greatly , and they hastened to drain the
marsh where the hydra had dwelt so that never again could such an
enemy abide upon their lands . 

THE THIRD LABOUR--CAPTURING THE ARCADIAN HIND

In the days in which Hercules lived , Arcadia was a beautiful country
of cool , sweet-scented woods , clear mountain streams , and sloping
meadow-sides from which rose every now and then the roof of a
hunter ' s cottage or a shepherd ' s hutch . It was a country also
peculiarly pleasing to Artemis , the goddess of the chase , and
peculiarly also it was the haunt of all animals especially dear to
the goddess . 

A hind was there of such loveliness and grace that Artemis had
marked her for her own , and given her a pair of golden horns so that
she might be known from all other deer and her life thus preserved . 
For no good Hellen , or Greek , would slay for food any animal sacred
to a god . This beautiful golden-horned hind Eurystheus ordered
Hercules to bring to him alive , for the irreverence of the King did
not go so far as to demand her dead . 

So Hercules went forth for the hunting and , not wishing to wound the
hind , pursued her for one entire year . Up hill he went , down many a
mountain dale , across many a gleaming river , through deep forest and
open field , and always dancing before him were the golden tips of
horns of the hind--near enough to be seen , too far to be seized . At
last tired with the pursuit the lovely beast one day took refuge
upon a mountain side , and there as she sought the water of a river , 
Hercules struck her with an arrow . The wound was slight , but it
helped the hero to catch the creature , and to lift her to his
shoulders . Thereupon , he started for the court of Eurystheus . 

But the way was long , and it lay through a part of Arcadia where the
bush was heavy , and forests were deep , and mountains were high , and
while Hercules was pursuing his way and bearing his meek-eyed
burden , he one day met the fair goddess to whom the hind was sacred . 
Her brother , the beautiful god Apollo , was with her . 

Artemis seeing her captured deer cried to the hero ,  " Mortal , oho ! 
thus wilt thou violate a creature set aside by the gods ? "  " Mighty
Artemis and huntress , " answered Hercules ,  " this hind I know is
thine . A twelve-month have I chased and at last caught her . But the
god Necessity forced me ! Oh , immortal one , I am not impious . 
Eurystheus commanded me to catch the hind and the priestess of
Apollo enjoined me to observe the King ' s command . " 

When Artemis understood how Hercules was bond-man she dismissed her
anger , and sent him forward with kind words , and thus he brought the
golden-horned hind to Mycenae and sent it in to the King . 

THE FOURTH LABOUR--CAPTURING THE BOAR OF ERYMANTHUS

In the northwestern part of the famed Arcadia where the golden-
horned hind roamed was a range of mountains called Erymanthus . Over
the high tops of this range wandered also a wild beast , but unlike
the lovely hind he was fierce and terrible of aspect and deadly in
encounter . He was known as the boar of Erymanthus . This tusked and
terrible being the King of Mycenae , Eurystheus , commanded the mighty
Hercules , his bondman , to bring alive to him . 

Again Hercules set out , and again he fared over hill and across
bright waters , and as he went the birds sang spring songs to him
from vine and tree shade , and yellow crocuses carpeted the earth . In
his journey he came one day to the home of Pholus , a centaur , who
dwelt with other centaurs upon the side of a mountain . Now the
centaurs were , of all the dwellers of that distant land , most unlike
us modern folks . For report has it that they were half that noble
creature man , and half that noble creature horse: that is to say , 
they were men as far as the waist , and then came the body of the
horse with its swift four feet . There are those , indeed , who claim
that the centaurs were men and rode their mountain ponies so deftly
that man and horse seemed one whole creature . Be that as it may , 
upon this mountain side the centaur Pholus dwelt with others of his
kind , and there to visit with him came Hercules . 

The centaur with his hospitable heart and own hands prepared a
dinner of roast meat for the hungry traveller , and as they sat at
the board in genial converse they had much enjoyment . But Hercules
was also thirsty , and the sparkling water from the mountain spring
seemed not to satisfy him . He asked the centaur for wine .  " Ah , wine , 
my guest-friend Hercules , " answered Pholus ,  " I have none of my own . 
Yonder is a jar of old vintage , but it belongs to all the centaurs
of our mountain and I cannot open it . "  " But friend Pholus , " said
Hercules pressingly ,  " I would I had a little for my stomach ' s sake . " 

Now the centaur had a kind heart as we have said , and he rejoiced
that Hercules had come , and to give the hero his desires he opened
the jar . The wine was made from grapes that grew under the fair
skies of Arcadia and its fragrance was like a scent of lilies or of
roses , and when the soft winds entered the door , near which Hercules
sat drinking , it seized the perfume and bore it over the mountain
side . Now hear of all the mischief a little wine may make . 

The fragrance in the air told the centaurs , wherever each happened
to be , that their wine jar had been opened , and they rushed to its
resting place perhaps to defend it from any wayfaring thief , perhaps
to help drink it , we do not know . But each came angrily to the mouth
of the cave of Pholus and all were armed with stones and staves
which they had seized as they hastened onward . When they first
entered with raging cries and threatening gesture Hercules grasped
the brands burning on the hospitable hearth and drove them back . As
others pressed behind them the hero drew forth his arrows poisoned
with the gall of the Lernean hydra , and sent among them many a
shaft . Thus they fought retreating and , they fleeing and Hercules
pursuing , came finally to the dwelling of Chiron , most famed of all
the centaurs and a teacher of Hercules in his youth , teacher of his
great art of surgery . 

The wine raging in the veins of Hercules made him for the moment
forgetful of all the good Chiron had bestowed upon him , and still
letting fly his poisonous arrows he , aiming at another , hit the
noblest of the centaurs . Grief seized Hercules when he saw what he
had done and he ran and drew out the arrow and applied a soft
ointment which Chiron himself had taught him to make . But it was in
vain , for the centaur , inspiring teacher and famed for his love of
justice as he was , soon gave up the ghost . 

Saddened at his own madness Hercules now returned to the cave of his
guest-friend Pholus . There among others his host lay , and stark
dead . He had drawn an arrow from the body of one who had died from
its wound , and , while examining it and wondering how so slight a
shaft could be so fatal , had accidentally dropped it out of his
hand . It struck his foot and he expired that very moment . 

Hercules paid all funeral honour to his friends and afterward
departing from the unhappy neighbourhood took up his search of the
boar . 

Heavy snows were lying on the crests of Erymanthus when Hercules
came upon the tracks of the wild creature , and following patiently
finally reached his lair . There the boar stood , his tusks pointed
outward ready for attack , his eyes snapping vindictively . He was
indeed a terrible thing to see . 

Hercules , instead of shooting at the animal , began to call , and
shouting with loud cries he so confused the boar that he ran into
the vast snowdrift standing near by . Thereupon the hero seized and
bound him with a wild grapevine he had brought for the purpose . And
so swinging him over his shoulder he took his way toward Mycenae . 

The King Eurystheus was terribly frightened at the very prospect of
having the boar to keep , and when he heard Hercules was coming to
town with the animal on his shoulders he took to the brazen
underground chamber , which he had built , when Hercules came in with
the body of the Nemean lion . There he stayed for several days , 
according to a good old historian , Diodorus , who in writing of the
King told that he was so great a coward . 

THE FIFTH LABOUR--CLEANSING THE STABLES OF AUGEAS

Although Eurystheus was seized with tremor at the coming of Hercules
with the Erymanthian boar , still he continued relentless , and
demanded the performance of the next task , which was nothing less
than the cleaning out in one day of stables where numerous cattle
had been confined for many years . These noisome stalls belonged to
Augeas , a King of Elis and a man rich in herds--so rich indeed that
as the years passed and his cattle increased he could not find men
enough to care for his kine and their house . Thus the animals had
continued , and had so littered their abiding place that it had
become well nigh intolerable and a source of disease and even of
pestilence to the people . 

When Hercules came to King Augeas he said nothing to him of the
command Eurystheus had laid upon him , but looking through the
stables which covered a space of many meadows he spoke of the cattle
and the evil condition of their housing .  " The moon-eyed kine will do
better in clean stables , " said the wise Hercules ,  " and if thou wilt
pledge me a tenth of thy herds I will clean out thy stalls in a
day . " To this Augeas delightedly agreed and , speaking as they were
in the presence of the young son of the King , Hercules called upon
the prince to witness the pact . 

Now Hercules in going about the great stables had noticed that at
the upper end of their building flowed a swift river , and at the
lower end was a second swift stream . When therefore Augeas had
pledged himself to the work , Hercules , beginning early next day , 
took down the walls at the upper end of the stalls and the walls at
the lower end . Then with his own mighty hands he dug channels and
canals and led the waters of the upper swift-flowing river into the
heavily littered floor of the stalls . And the waters rose and pushed
the litter before them and made one channel into the lower river , 
and then another and another and so , working through the hours of
the day , the upper river scoured the stables clean and carried the
refuse to the lower river . And the lower river took the burden and
carried it out to the salt sea , which is ever and always cleaning
and purifying whatever comes to its waters . And when night fell
there stood the hero Hercules looking at his work--the filthy
stables of Augeas cleaned . 

When next day Hercules asked for the tenth of the herds which the
King had pledged , Augeas refused to stand by his agreement . He had
learned that this labour of cleaning his stables had been imposed
upon Hercules , and he claimed he should pay nothing for it; in fact , 
he denied he had promised anything , and offered to lay the matter
before judges . The cause therefore was tried , and at the trial the
young son of the King , who had witnessed the pact , testified to the
truth of Hercules ' claim . This so enraged his father that in most
high-handed manner he banished both his son and the hero from Elis
without waiting for the judgment of the court . Hercules returned to
Mycenae . But again the cowardly and contemptible Eurystheus refused
to count this labour , saying Hercules had done it for hire . 



THE SIXTH LABOUR--SHOOTING THE STYMPHALIAN BIRDS

Far in the famed land of Arcadia is a beautiful lake known so many
years ago , as in the time of Hercules , and even by us in our day , as
Lake Stymphalus . It is a lake of pure sweet water and it lies , as
such waters lie in our own country , high up in mountains and amid
hillsides covered with firs and poplars and clinging vines and wild
blossoms . 

In our day the lake is a resort for gentle singing birds , but in the
time of Hercules other birds were there also . The other birds were
water fowls , and they had gathered at Lake Stymphalus because they
had been driven out of their old home by wolves , who alone were
hungrier and more destructive than they . These fowls had claws of
iron , and every feather of theirs was sharper than a barbed arrow , 
and so strong and fierce and ravenous they were that they would dart
from the air and attack hunters , yea , and pecking them down would
tear and strip their flesh till but a bony skeleton remained of that
which a few minutes before had been a strong , active , buoyant man
seeking in the chase food for his hearthside . 

To make way with this horrid tribe of the air was the sixth command
Eurystheus laid upon Hercules . Toward Lake Stymphalus therefore
turned our hero . Again he walked Arcadian waysides , and again as he
fared the spring sun shone above , and the birds sang welcome , and
the narcissus lifted its golden cup , and as he went his heart
rejoiced in his life , whatever the difficulty of his labour , and in
the beauty of the world before his eyes . And as he walked also he
thought of how he should accomplish the great undertaking upon which
he was bent . 

While thus deliberating the grey-eyed goddess of wisdom , Athene , 
came to him--just as this goddess even in our day comes to those who
think--and she suggested to his mind that he should scare the fowl
from their retreat by brazen rattles . The goddess did even more than
put the notion of using a rattle in the mind of Hercules . It is said
she actually brought him one , a huge , bronze clapper made for him by
the forger of the gods , limping Hephaestus . 

Hercules took this rattle and mounting a neighbouring height shook
it in his great hands till every hill echoed and the very trees
quivered with the horrid sound . And the man-eating birds ? Not one
remained hidden . Each and every one rose terrified in the air , 
croaking and working its steely talons and sharp-pointed feathers in
dire fear . 

Now from his quiver the hero fast picked his barbed arrows , and fast
he shot and every shot brought to his feet one of the terrible man-
eaters , till at last he had slain every one . Or , if indeed , any of
the tribe had escaped , they had flown far away , for never after , in
all the long history of Lake Stymphalus , have such creatures
appeared again above its fair waters . 

So ended the sixth labour of Hercules . 

THE SEVENTH LABOUR--CAPTURING THE CRETAN BULL

Just as Zeus who , as we said in the beginning , was King of all
heaven that is the air and clouds , so Posidon was King of the sea . 
With his queen , Amphitrite , he lived far down underneath the waves , 
and dwelt in a palace splendid with all the beautiful things of the
deep . 

In the midst of the blue waters of the Mediterranean where Posidon
had his home , lies an island called Crete , and long ago in the days
when Hercules laboured , a King , whose name was Minos , ruled over
this land . The island is long and narrow and has much sea coast , and
because of this fact King Minos stood in intimate relations with the
god of the sea . 

Now one day in an especial burst of friendliness , Minos vowed to
sacrifice to Posidon whatever should come out of the salt waters . 
The god in pleasure at the vow , and to test mayhap the devotion of
Minos , sent at once a beautiful bull leaping and swimming through
the waves . When the creature had come to the rocky coast and made
land , its side shone with such beauty , and its ivory-white horns
garlanded with lilies set so like a crown above its graceful head
that Minos and all the people who saw it marvelled that anywhere
could have grown such a bull . And a sort of greed and deceit seized
Minos as he gazed , and for his sacrifice to Posidon he resolved to
use another bull . And so he ordered his herdsman to take this fair
creature that had come from the sea and to put it among his herd , 
and also to bring forth another for the offering . 

Because of this avarice of Minos the god below the waves was angry
and he made the bull wild and furious , so that no herdsman dared
approach to feed or care for it . For his seventh task Eurystheus
commanded Hercules to fetch him this mad bull of Crete . 

Hercules accordingly boarded one of the ships that plied in that
far-off day , as well as in this time of ours , between the rocky
coast of Crete and the fair land of Hellas , and in due time the hero
came to Minos ' court .  " I have come , sire , " said Hercules ,  " for the
mad bull that terrifies thy herdsmen and is rumoured beyond
capture . "  " Ay , young man , " cried the king ,  " thou hast come for my
bull and my bull shalt thou have . When thou hast taken it , it is
thine , " and the King laughed grimly , for the strength and fury of
the creature he deemed beyond any man ' s control . 

Hercules sought the grove where Posidon ' s gift had strayed from its
fellows , and there deftly seizing it by the horns , he bound its feet
with stout straps of bull ' s hide and its horns he padded with moss
of the sea from which it came , and so having made it powerless he
lifted it to his shoulders and carried it to the shore . A swift
black ship was just spreading sail from Crete , and entering upon it
the hero soon ended his journey and laid his capture before
Eurystheus . A day or two later Hercules loosed the bull , which , 
after wandering through the woodlands of Arcadia , crossed the
isthmus and came to the plains of Marathon , whence , after doing much
damage , it swam off to sea and was never heard of after . 

So far we have told how Hercules accomplished seven of the tasks
laid upon him . Space does not permit us to recount in detail the
other five . The eighth task was to bring to Eurystheus the man-
eating mares of the King of Windy Thrace . The ninth task was to
fetch a girdle which Ares , god of war , had given the Queen of the
Amazons--an exceedingly difficult labour , for the Amazons were a
nation of women-warriors renowned for valour . For the tenth task
Eurystheus demanded the purple oxen of a famous giant who dwelt on
an island far out in the ocean . The eleventh task was to bring
apples from the garden of the Hesperides--golden apples guarded by a
dragon with a hundred heads , no one of which ever closed its eyes in
sleep . And the twelfth and last task , which was to free the mighty
Hercules from his bondage to cowardly Eurystheus , was to fetch
Cerberus , the three-headed dog , who guarded the entrance to Hades , 
the unseen abode of departed spirits . 

Each and every one of these labours the strong hero accomplished . 
Having won his freedom and gained the honours promised by the
priestess at Delphi many years before , Hercules worked many a noble
deed and finally in reward for his much enduring and his aid to
mortals , he was carried upon a thunder cloud to the upper air , and
entered into the very gates of heaven . 


