Now there dwelt in a castle in the Netherland a certain King , 
Siegmund by name , who had to wife a fair lady Sieglind . These two
had a son whom they called Siegfried , a very gallant prince . Very
carefully did they train and teach him , but the root of the matter
was in the lad himself , for he had an honest and good heart , and was
in all things a very perfect knight . This Siegfried being come to
man's estate , and being well practised in arms , and having also as
much of wealth as he needed , turned his thoughts to marriage , 
desiring to win a fair bride for himself . 

It came to Prince Siegfried's ears that there was a very fair maiden
in the Rhineland , and that many noble knights had come from far and
wide to make their suits to her , but that she would have none of
them . Never yet had she seen the man whom she would take for her
husband . All this the Prince heard , and he said , "This Kriemhild
will I have for my wife . " But King Siegmund , when he heard of his
son's purpose , was not a little troubled thereat; and Queen Sieglind
wept , for she knew the brother of Kriemhild , and she was aware of
the strength and valour of his warriors . So they said to the Prince , 
"Son , this is not a wise wooing . " But Siegfried made answer , "My
father , I will have none of wedlock , if I may not marry where I
love . " Thereupon the King said . "If thou canst not forego this
maiden , then thou shalt have all the help that I can give . "

Queen Sieglind said: "If you are still minded to go , then I will
prepare for you and your companions the best raiment that ever
warrior wore . "

Siegfried bowed low to his mother , saying: "So be it; only remember
that twelve comrades only will I take with me . "

So the Queen and her ladies sat stitching night and day , taking no
rest till the raiment was ready . King Siegmund the while commanded
that the men should polish their war-gear , coats of mail , and
helmets , and shields . 

The thirteen comrades departed and , on the seventh day , they rode
into the town of Worms in Rhineland , a gallant company , bravely
arrayed , for their garments flashed with gold , and their war-gear , 
over their coats of mail and their helmets , were newly polished . 
Their long swords hung down by their sides , even to their spurs , and
sharp were the javelins which they held in their hands . The javelin
of Siegfried was two spans broad in the blade , and had a double
edge . Terrible were the wounds that it made . Their bridles were
gilded , and their horse-girths of silk . A comely sight they were to
see , and the people came from all round to gaze upon them . 

Tidings had been brought to King Gunther that certain warriors were
come , very gallant to look upon and richly clad , but that no one
knew who they were , and whence they came . "Now , " said the King , 
"this troubles me much that no one can tell whence these warriors
come . " To him Ortwein , the High Server , made answer , "Seeing , sire , 
that no man knows aught about these strangers , let some one fetch
Hagen , my uncle; he knows all the kingdoms of the world , and the
dwellers therein . "

So Hagen went to the window and looked at the men . Well pleased was
he with their clothing and their gear of war; but he had never seen
their like in the Rhineland . So he said: "Whencesoever these men
have come , my lord , that they are princes or of a prince's company
is clear . But stay; Siegfried , the famous hero , I have never seen
with my eyes , but I verily believe that is he . If it indeed be , 
there is no warrior in this land , that is his match for strength and
valour . 

"Once upon a time riding alone , with none to help him , he came upon
the treasure of the Nibelungs . It had been newly taken out of the
hollow of a mountain , and the Nibelungs were making ready to share
it . And when they saw him , one cried aloud , 'Here comes Siegfried , 
the great champion from the Motherland ! ' So the two princes of the
Nibelungs bade him welcome , and would have him divide the treasure
among them . A mighty store it was , of jewels such plenty that scarce
five-score wagons could carry them away , and of red gold yet more . 
All this they would have Siegfried divide among them . And for his
wages they gave him the Nibelungs' sword . But little did they know
what should befall at his hand . For lo ! ere he had ended his
dividing , they stirred up strife against him . Twelve stout comrades
had the princes , and with these the princes thought to have slain
Siegfried . But they availed nought; with the very sword which they
had given him for his reward--Balmung was its name--he slew them
all . The giants he slew , and the Kings also , and when Albrich the
dwarf would have avenged his lords--for he was the keeper of the
treasure--Siegfried overcame him also , and wrested from him the Hood
of Darkness , which whoso dons , straightway he vanishes from the
sight of all men . 

"But the treasure he would not take for himself . 'Carry it back , '
said he to Albrich the dwarf , 'to the hole whence it was taken , and
keep if for me . And you shall swear a great oath to do me any
service that I shall ask of you , whensoever and wheresoever may seem
good to me . '

"Another story have I heard tell of Siegfried , how he slew a dragon
with his own hand and sword , and how he bathed him in the dragon's
blood , and made his skin so hard and horny that no sword may pierce
it . Let us . therefore receive him with all courtesy; for verily he
is a right strong and valiant knight , and 'tis better , I ween , to be
his friend than his enemy . "

"Methinks thou art right , " said King Gunther . "Let us go down and
greet him courteously . "

Never were guests more honoured as , of a surety , never guests had
bolder mien . And as the days went by the Kings and their guests gave
themselves to sport and pastime; but whatever they did , Siegfried
was ever the first; none could put the stone so far , or cast the
spear with so sure an aim . Sometimes the fair ladies of the court
looked on , and not a few looked on the young Prince from the
Netherland with favour . But he had ever one only in his heart , ever
the fair Kriemhild . 

King Gunther purposed in his heart to marry a wife . No daughter of
his own land would he woo , though there were many fair maidens in
the Rhineland . But there came to him tidings of a Queen that dwelt
beyond the sea; not to be matched was she for beauty , nor had she
any peer for strength . Her love she proffered to any warrior who
could vanquish her at three games , hurling of the spear , and putting
the stone , and leaping . But if the suitor himself should be
vanquished , then must he lose his head . Such were the conditions of
her wooing , and many brave warriors had died for her . 

On a certain day King Gunther and his chiefs sat in council , and the
matter was this--where shall the King seek a wife who shall both be
for a comfort to him and for a glory to the land ? Then spake the
King , "I will seek Queen Brunhild and no other . For her will I
hazard my life; nor do I care to live if I may not win her for my
wife . " To him spake Siegfried , "I would have you give up this
purpose . He who woos Brunhild plays for too high a stake . Take my
counsel , sire , and go not on such a journey . " "I should think it
scorn , " said he , "to fear a woman , were she ever so bold and
strong . " "Ah , sire , " Siegfried made answer , "you know not how strong
she is . Were you four men and not one only , you could not prevail
over her . "

But King Gunther would not yield . "How strong soever she be , and
whatever the chances that befall me , I will woo this fair Brunhild , "
he said . Then said Hagen , the King's uncle , "Since you are resolved
to take in hand this enterprise , ask Prince Siegfried to help you . "
Then said King Gunther to Siegfried , "Will you help me to win this
Brunhild for my wife ? Do this , and ask of me what you will . "
Siegfried made answer , "Give me your sister: I ask no other reward
but that I may have the fair Kriemhild to wife . " "That I promise , "
said the King . "Of a surety , so soon as I shall have brought the
fair Brunhild to this realm , then will I give you my sister to wife;
and I pray from my heart that you may live long and happily
together . " Then the two sware to each other . 

"Tell me now , " said Gunther , "how shall we travel to this land where
Brunhild dwells ? Shall we go in such state as befits a King ? If you
think fit , I could well bring together thirty thousand warriors . "
"Thirty thousand would avail nothing . " answered Siegfried , "so
strong she is and savage . We will take no army , but go as simple
knights , taking two companions with us , and the two shall be Sir
Hagen and Sir Dankwart . " "And wherewithal shall we be clothed ? " said
King Gunther . "As richly as maybe , " answered Siegfried . "My mother
has a great store of goodly raiment , " said the King . Then spake
Hagen , "Nay , sire , go not to the Queen , but rather to your sister . 
She will provide all things that you need . "

So they went to the Lady Kriemhild and told her all their purpose , 
and how they should need goodly raiment , three changes for the day , 
and that for four days . With good will did the fair Kriemhild
receive them , and promised that she would give them what they
needed . As she promised , so she did; for she and her ladies , thirty
maids skilful in the work of the needle , laboured night and day to
furnish a rich store of apparel . The fair Kriemhild planned them and
cut them to just measure with her own hand and her ladies sewed
them . Silks there were , some from Arabia , white as snow , and from
the Lesser Asia others , green as grass , and strange skins of fishes
from distant seas , and fur of the ermine , with black spots on snowy
white , and precious stones and gold of Arabia . In seven weeks all
was prepared , both apparel and also arms and armour; and there was
nothing that was either over-long or over-short , or that could be
surpassed for comeliness . Great thanks did the warriors give to each
fair seamstress , and to Kriemhild the beautiful the greatest thanks
of all . 

So the four companions embarked on their ship , with Siegfried for
their helmsman , for he knew all the tides and currents of Rhine . 
Well furnished were they with food and wine and all things that they
needed; and prosperous was their voyage , both while they sailed down
the river and while they crossed the sea . 

On the twelfth morning they came to the land of Queen Brunhild . And
when King Gunther saw how the coast stretched far away , and how on
every height there stood a fair castle , he said to Siegfried , "Tell
me , Siegfried , if you can , whose are those castles , and this fair
land . Never in all my life , I assure you , have I seen castles so
fairly planned and built so well . " Siegfried made answer , "These
castles and this fair land are Queen Brunhild's and this strong
fortress that you see is Isenstein . And now , my comrades , I have a
counsel for your ears . To-day we shall stand in Queen Brunhild's
court , and we must be wise and wary when we stand before her . Let
therefore one and the same story be found in the mouth of all--that
Gunther is my master , and that I am Gunther's man . If we would win
our purpose there is no surer plan than this . " So spake Siegfried to
his comrades . And to the King he said , "Mark , I pray you , what I do
for the love of your fair sister . "

While they talked one to the other the bark drifted so near to the
shore that they could see the maidens standing at the castle
windows . "Who are these ? " said King Gunther to Siegfried . Said
Siegfried , "Look with all your eyes at these fair ladies , and tell
me which of them pleases you best , and which , could you win her , you
would choose for your wife . " Gunther made answer , "One that I see at
yonder window in a snow-white vest is surely the loveliest of all . 
She , if I can win her , shall surely be my wife . " "You have chosen
well , " said Siegfried; "that maiden in the snow-white vest is
Brunhild , the fairest and fiercest of women . "

Meanwhile the Queen had bidden her maidens depart from the windows . 
"'Tis a shame , " said she , "that you should make yourselves a sight
for strangers . "

And now came the four comrades from their bark to the castle . 
Siegfried led a noble charger by the bridle , and stood by the
stirrup till King Gunther had mounted , serving him as a vassal
serves his lord . This Brunhild marked from where she stood . "A noble
lord , " thought she in her heart , "whom such a vassal serves . " Then
Siegfried mounted his own steed , and Hagen and Dankwart did the
like . A fairer company never was seen . The King and Siegfried were
clothed in white , and white were their horses , and their shields
flashed far as they moved . So , in lordly fashion , they rode to the
hall of Queen Brunhild , and the bells of gold that hung from their
saddles tinkled as they went . Hagen and Dankwart , on the other hand , 
wore black apparel , and their chargers were black . 

Meanwhile the fair Brunhild inquired of her nobles who these
strangers might be that had come across the sea , and on what errand
they had come . One of them answered , "Fair lady , I have never seen
these stout warriors , save one only , who is greatly like to the
noble Siegfried . If this be he , I would have you give him a hearty
welcome . Next to him is a man of right royal mien , a King , I trow , 
who rules with his sceptre mighty lands and herd . The third has a
lowering brow , but is a stout warrior withal; the fourth is young
and modest of look , but for all his gentle bearing , we should all
rue it , I trow , if wrong were done to him . "

Then spake Queen Brunhild , "Bring me now my royal vesture; if
Siegfried seeks to woo me for his wife , he must risk his life on the
cast; I fear him not so much as to yield to him without a struggle . "
So the Queen arrayed her in her royal robes , and went to the hall of
audience , and a hundred maidens and more followed her , fair of face
and in fair array . And after the maidens came five hundred warriors
and more , each bearing his sword in his hand , the very flower of
Isenland . 

Said Queen Brunhild to Siegfried , "You are welcome , good Sir
Siegfried . Show me , if you will , for what cause you have come
hither . " "I thank you a thousand times , " answered Siegfried , "that
you have greeted me so courteously , but know that I must give place
to this noble hero . He is my lord and master; I am his vassal . Let
your favour be for him . His kingdom is by the Rhine side , and we
have sailed all this way from thence that he may woo you for his
bride . That is his fixed intent , nor will he yield whatever may
befall . Gunther is his name; a great King is he , and nothing will
content him but to carry you back with him to the Rhine . "

Queen Brunhild answered , "If he is the master and you the man , then
let him know that he must match me in my games and conquer me . If he
prevail , then will I be his wedded wife; but if I prevail , then must
he die , he and you and all his comrades . " Then spake Sir Hagen , 
"Lady , tell us now the games at which my master must contend; and
know that you must strive full hard , if you would conquer him , for
he has a full trust that he will win you for his bride . " The Queen
answered , "He must cast the stone further than I , and also leap
behind it further than I leap; and also he must cast the spear with
me . It seems to me that you are over-hasty; let him count the cost , 
ere he lose both fame and life . " Then Siegfried whispered to the
King , "Have no fear for what shall be , and cast away all your care . 
Let the fair Brunhild do what she will , I will bear you harmless . "
So the King spake aloud , "Fairest of the fair , tell me your
pleasure; were it a greater task willingly would I undertake it , for
if I win you not for my bride , willingly will I lose my head . "

Then the fair Brunhild called for her battle gear , her arms , and her
breastplate of gold and her mighty shield; and over all she drew a
surcoat of silk , marvellously made . Fierce and angry was her
countenance as she looked at the strangers , and Hagen and Dankwart
were troubled to see her , for they doubted how it might go with
their master . "'Tis a fatal journey , " said they , "and will bring us
to trouble . "

Meanwhile Siegfried hied him with nimble foot to the bark , and there
he took , from the secret corner where he kept it , the Hood of
Darkness , by which , at his will , he could make himself invisible . 
Quickly did he go , and quickly returned , and now no one could see
him , for he wore the hood . Through the crowd he went at his
pleasure , seeing all but seen of none . 

Meanwhile men had marked out the ring for the fray , and chiefs had
been chosen as umpires , seven hundred men in armour who should judge
betwixt the combatants . First of the two came the fair Brunhild . So
mighty was her presence , a man had thought her ready to match
herself in battle with all the Kings in the world . And there was
carried before her a mighty shield of ruddy gold , very thick and
broad and heavy , overlaid with studs of steel . Four chamberlains
could scarce bear the weight . Sir Hagen , when he saw it , said , "How
now , my lord King ? this fair one whom you would woo must surely be
the devil's wife . "Next came three men who scarce could carry the
Queen's javelin , with its mighty spear-head , heavy and great as
though three had been melted into one . And when King Gunther saw it , 
he said to himself , "This is a danger from which the devil himself
can scarce escape . I would that I were once more by the banks of
Rhine; he that would might woo and win this fair maiden for me . "
After this there was brought the mighty stone which Brunhild was to
hurl . Twelve knights could scarce support it , so big it was . 

And now the Queen addressed her to the contest , rolling her sleeves
about her arms , and fitting her buckler , and poising her mighty
spear in her hand . And the strangers , when they saw it , were sore
afraid for all their courage . 

But now came Siegfried to King Gunther's side and touched his hand . 
Greatly amazed was the King for he did not understand his champion's
device . "Who was it that touched me ? " he said , and looked round , but
saw no one . "'Tis I , " answered the Prince , "your trusty friend , 
Siegfried . Have no fear of the maiden . Let me carry the buckler; you
shall seem to do each deed , but I will do it in truth . But be
careful to hide the device . Should the maiden discover it , she will
not spare to bring it to nought . " Right glad was Gunther to know
that his strong ally was at hand . 

And now the Queen threw the spear with all her might against the
shield Siegfried bore upon his arm . New was the shield and stout of
make , but the spearhead passed clean through it , and rang on the
hero's coat of mail , dealing him so sore a blow that the blood
gushed forth from his mouth . Of a truth , but for the Hood of
Darkness , that hour both the champions had died . Then Siegfried
caught the great spear in his hand , and tore it from the shield , and
hurled it back . "She is too fair to slay , " said he to himself , and
he turned the spear point behind him , and smote the maiden with the
shaft on the silken vest that she wore . Loud rang the blow , and the
fire-sparks leapt from her armour . Never could Gunther , for all his
strength , have dealt such a blow , for it felled the strong Brunhild
to the ground . Lightly did she leap up again , crying , "King Gunther , 
I thank you for the blow; 'twas shrewdly given , " for she thought
that the King had dealt it . 

But great was the wrath in her heart to find that her spear had sped
in vain . And now she turned to the great stone where it lay , and
poised it in her hand , and hurled it with all her might . And having
hurled it , she herself leapt after it . Twelve full arms' length
hurtled the great stone through the air , so mighty was the maiden , 
and she herself overpassed it by a pace . Then came Gunther to the
place , with Siegfried unseen by his side . And Siegfried caught the
stone and poised it--but it seemed to all as if Gunther did it--and
threw it yet another arm's length beyond the cast of the maid , and
passed the stone himself , aye , and carried King Gunther along with
him , so mighty was he ! 

But when the Queen saw that she was vanquished , she flushed with
shame and wrath , and turning to her lords , she spake aloud , "Come
hither , my kinsmen and lieges . You must now be thralls of King
Gunther of Burgundy . "

So the chiefs of Isenland laid their swords at Gunther's feet and
did him homage , for they thought that he had vanquished by his own
strength; and he , for he was a very gentle , courteous knight , 
greeted the maid right pleasantly , and she , for her part , took him
by the hand and said , "Henceforth , Sir King , all the rule and power
that I have held is yours . "

There is no need to tell how Gunther and Brunhild and all their
company travelled to Rhineland with great joy , and how Queen Ute and
her sons and the fair Kriemhild , and all the people of the land , 
gave them a hearty welcome and how in due time King Gunther was
married to the fair Brunhild . Nor is there need of many words to
relate how Siegfried also took to wife the beautiful Kriemhild , as
it had been promised him . Nor were there any to gainsay save
Brunhild only , for she grudged that her husband's sister should be
given to a vassal , for such in truth she deemed him to be . Very ill
content she was , though the King would fain have satisfied her , 
saying that he was a very noble knight , and was lord of many
woodlands , and had great store of gold and treasure . 

So Siegfried wedded the fair Kriemhild and took her with him to his
own land . A goodly welcome did the Netherlands give her . And
Siegmund gave up his kingdom to his son , and the two lived in much
peace and love together; and when in the tenth year a son was born
to them , they called him by the name of his uncle Gunther . 

Also Gunther and Brunhild lived together in much happiness . They
also had a son , and they called him by the name of Siegfried . 

But Brunhild was ill content that Siegfried being , far so she
deemed , her husband's vassal , should pay no homage to his lord and
do no service for his fee . And she was very urgent with her husband
that he should suffer this no longer . But the King was fain to put
her off . "Nay , " said he , "the journey is too long . Their land is far
from ours; why should we trouble him to come ? Also he is a great
prince and a powerful . " "Be he as great as he will , " she answered , 
"'tis a vassal's duty to pay homage to his lord . " But Gunther
laughed to himself . Little thought had he of homage from Siegfried . 
Then the Queen changed her voice . "Dear lord , " she said , "how gladly
would I see Siegfried and your dear sister once more . Well do I
remember how fair she was and how kind , how gracious of speech when
we sat together , brides both of us . " With such words she persuaded
her husband . "There are no guests that would be more welcome , " said
he; "I will find messengers who shall bid them come to the
Rhineland . "

Great was the joy in Rhineland when the messengers returned and told
how they had been welcomed and royally entertained and loaded with
gifts , and how that Siegfried and his Queen Kriemhild and a company
of gallant knights were coming to the festival . Great was the joy
and manifold the preparations . 

No sooner did the King hear the news than he sought out Queen
Brunhild where she sat in her chamber . "Bear you in mind , " said he , 
"how Kriemhild my sister welcomed you when you came hither from your
own land . Do you , therefore , dear wife , welcome her with the like
affection . " "So shall it be , " answered the Queen . 

And indeed , when the guests came , right royal was the welcome that
they had . For Gunther and Brunhild rode forth from the city to meet
them , and greeted them most heartily . All was mirth and jollity . By
the day there were tilts and tournaments and sports of every kind , 
and at night there was feasting in the hall . And so they did for
twelve days . 

But Brunhild ever cherished a thought of mischief in her heart . 
"Why , " she said to herself , "why has Siegfried stayed so long to do
homage for that which he holds of us in fee ? I shall not be content
till Kriemhild answer me in this . "

It fell out on a certain day , while sundry knights were in the
castle court , that the two Queens sat together . The fair Kriemhild
then began , "My husband is so mighty a man that he should rule these
kingdoms of right . " "Nay , " answered Brunhild , "that might be were
you and your husband only alive , and all others dead , but so long as
Gunther lives he must needs be King . " Then said fair Kriemhild , "See
how he shines among the knights , a very moon among the stars . "
Brunhild answered , "However brave and strong he may be , and stately
to look upon , Gunther , your brother , is better than he . " "Nay , " said
Kriemhild , "better he is not , nay , nor even his peer . " "How say
you ? " answered Brunhild in wrath; "I spake not without cause . When I
saw the two for the first time , then I heard with my own ears how
Siegfried confessed that he was Gunther's man . Yea , I heard him say
it , and I hold him to be such . " "This is folly , " said Kriemhild;
"think you that my brothers could have given me to be bride to a
vassal ? Away , Brunhild , with such idle talk , if we would still be
friends . " "I will not away with it , " Brunhild made answer . "Shall I
renounce the service which he and all the vassals are bound to
render to their lord ? " "Renounce it you must , " cried Kriemhild in
great wrath . "The service of a vassal he will never do; he is of
higher degree than Gunther my brother , though Gunther is a noble
King . " "You bear yourself far too proudly , " answered Brunhild . 

But the deadliest cause of quarrel was yet to come . Said Queen
Kriemhild to Queen Brunhild when next she saw her: "Think you that
when you were vanquished in your own land it was Gunther , my
brother , that vanquished you ? " "Yea , " answered the Queen , "did I not
see it with my own eyes ? " "Nay , " said Kriemhild , "it was not so . See
you this ring ? " And she took a ring that she had upon her finger and
held it forth . "Do you know it ? " And Brunhild looked and knew it for
her own . "That , " said Kriemhild , "Siegfried , my husband , took from
you when you were smitten by his spear and knew not what had
befallen you , so sore was the blow . You saw him not , for he had the
Hood of Darkness on him and was invisible . But it was he that smote
you with the spear , and put the stone further than you , and passed
you in the leap . And this ring he gave me for a token , if ever you
should boast yourself against me . Talk , therefore , no more of lords
and vassals . My husband feigned this vassalage that he might deceive
you the more readily . "

But Brunhild held her peace , for the ring was a proof which she
could not gainsay . She held her peace , but she cherished her rage , 
keeping it in the depths of her heart , and sware that she would be
avenged on the man that had so deceived her . 

When Hagen saw that Queen Brunhild was in continual trouble and
sadness he would fain know the cause . "'Tis of Siegfried's doing , "
she answered . "He has wronged me beyond pardon . " And she besought
him that he would avenge her and King Gunther upon him . 

So Hagan plotted evil , saying enemies were coming against Gunther , 
and Siegfried and his knights made them ready to go forth to the
King's defence . And of the chiefs of Rhineland not a few offered
themselves as comrades , knowing nothing of the treachery that Hagen
and his fellows were preparing against him . 

But before they departed Hagen went to bid farewell to Queen
Kriemhild . Said she , "I have good comfort in my heart to think how
valiant a husband I have , and how zealous he is to help his friends , 
for I have loved my kinsmen always , nor ever wished them ill . " "Tell
me , dear lady , " said Hagen , "what service I can do to your husband , 
for there is no one whom I love better than him . " The Queen made
answer , "I have no fear that my lord will fall in battle by any
man's sword , save only that he is too ready to follow even to
rashness his own warlike spirit . " "Dear lady , " said Hagen , "if there
is any danger which you hold in special fear , tell me that I may
defend him against it . " Then Kriemhild , in the simpleness of her
heart , told him the secret . "In years gone by , " said she , "my
husband slew a dragon among the mountains , and when he had slain the
monster , he bathed himself in its blood . So mighty was the charm , 
that thenceforth no steel had power to wound him . And yet , for all
this , I am ever in fear lest by some mischance a weapon should
pierce him . Hearken now , my cousin , for you are of my kindred , 
hearken , and see how I put my trust in your honour . While Siegfried
washed his limbs in the blood of the dragon , there fell a leaf from
a linden tree between his shoulders . There and there only can steel
harm him . " "'Tis easy , " said the false Hagen , "for me to defend so
small a spot . Only do you sew a little token on his cloak , that I
may the better know the spot that most needs protection when we
stand together in the fight . " "I will do so , " said the Queen; "I
will sew a little cross with threads of silk on his cloak , and you
will guard him when he fights in the throng of his foes . " "That will
I do , dear lady , " said the traitor . 

Hagen went straightway to King Gunther and said , "I have learnt that
which I needed to know; put off this march; let us go on a hunt . So
that which we would do will be easier done . " "I will order that , "
answered the King . 

Siegfried , before he set out for the hunting , bade farewell to his
wife: "God grant , " said he , "that we may soon meet happily again;
meanwhile be merry among your kinsfolk here . " But Kriemhild thought
of how she had discovered the secret to Hagen , and was sore afraid , 
yet dared not tell the truth . Only she said to her husband , "I pray
you to leave this hunting . Only this night past I had an evil dream . 
I saw two wild boars pursuing you over the heath , and the flowers
were red as with blood . Greatly I fear some treason , my Siegfried . "
"Nay , " said he , "there is not one in Rhineland here that bears me
ill-will . Whom have I wronged ? " "I know not , " answered the Queen , 
"but yet my heart bodes evil . For I had yet another dream . I seemed
to see two mountains fall with a terrible noise on your head . If you
go , you will break my heart . " But he laughed at her fears , and
kissed her , and so departed . 

Then Siegfried went on the hunting , and Gunther and Hagen went with
him , and a company of hunters and hounds . When they came to the
forest Siegfried said , "Now who shall begin the hunting ? " Hagen made
answer , "Let us divide into two companies ere we begin , and each
shall beat the coverts as he will; so shall we see who is the more
skilful in the chase . " "I need no pack , " said Siegfried; "give me
one well-trained hound that can track the game through the coverts . 
That will suffice for me . " So a lime-hound was given to him . All
that the good hound started did Siegfried slay; no beast could
outrun him or escape him . A wild boar first he slew , and next to the
boar a lion; he shot an arrow through the beast from side to side . 
After the lion he slew a buffalo and four elks , and a great store of
game besides , so that the huntsmen said , "Leave us something in our
woods , Sir Siegfried . "

King Gunther bade blow the horn for breakfast . When Siegfried's
huntsman heard the blast he said: "Our hunting-time is over; we must
back to our comrades . " So they went with all speed to the trysting-
place . 

The whole company sat down to their meal . There was plenty of every
kind , but wine was wanting . "How is this ? " said Siegfried: "the
kitchen is plentiful; but where is the wine ? " Said Gunther the King , 
"'Tis Hagen's fault , who makes us all go dry . " "True , Sir King , "
said Hagen , "my fault it is . But I know of a runnel , cold and clear , 
that is hard by . Let us go thither and quench our thirst . " Then
Siegfried rose from his place , for his thirst was sore , and would
have sought the place . Said Hagen , when he saw him rise , "I have
heard say that there is no man in all the land so fleet of foot as
Siegfried . Will he deign to let us see his speed ? " "With all my
heart , " cried the hero . "Let us race from hence to the runnel . "
"'Tis agreed , " said Hagen the traitor . "Furthermore , " said
Siegfried , "I will carry all the equipment that I bare in the
chase . " So Gunther and Hagen stripped them to their shirts , but
Siegfried carried sword and spear , all his hunting-gear , and yet was
far before the two at the runnel . 

Yet , such was his courtesy , that he would not drink before the King
had quenched his thirst . He was ill repaid , I trow , for his grace . 
For when the King had drunk , as Siegfried knelt plunging his head
into the stream , Sir Hagen took his spear and smote him on the
little crosslet mark that was worked on his cloak between his
shoulders . And when he had struck the blow he fled in mortal fear . 
When Siegfried felt that he was wounded , he rose with a great bound
from his knees and sought for his weapons . But these the false Hagen
had taken and laid far away . Only the shield was left . This he took
in his hand and hurled at Hagen with such might that it felled the
traitor to the ground , and was itself broken to pieces . If the hero
had but had his good sword Balmung in his hand , the murderer had not
escaped with his life that day . 

Then all the Rhineland warriors gathered about him . Among them was
King Gunther , making pretence to lament . To him said Siegfried , 
"Little it profits to bewail the man whose murder you have plotted . 
Did I not save you from shame and defeat ? Is this the recompense
that you pay ? And yet even of you I would ask one favour . Have some
kindness for my wife . She is your sister; if you have any knightly
faith and honour remaining , guard her well . " Then there came upon
him the anguish of death . Yet one more word he spake , "Be sure that
in slaying me you have slain yourselves . " And when he had so spoken
he died . 

Then they laid his body on a shield and carried it back , having
agreed among themselves to tell this tale , that Sir Siegfried having
chosen to hunt by himself was slain by robbers in the wood . 


