Because of the hardness towards the English people of William the
Conqueror , and of William's successors to several generations , many
an Englishman exiled himself from town and passed his life in the
greenwood . These men were called "outlaws . " First they went forth
out of love for the ancient liberties of England . Then in their
living in the forest , they put themselves without the law by their
ways of gaining their livelihood . Of such men none were more
renowned than Robin Hood and his company . 

We do not know anything about Robin Hood , who he was , or where he
lived , or what evil deed he had done . Any man might kill him and
never pay penalty for it . But , outlaw or not , the poor people loved
him and looked on him as their friend , and many a stout fellow came
to join him , and led a merry life in the greenwood , with moss and
fern for bed , and for meat the King's deer , which it was death to
slay . Tillers of the land , yeomen , and some say knights , went on
their ways freely , for of them Robin took no toll; but lordly
churchmen with money-bags well filled , or proud bishops with their
richly dressed followers , trembled as they drew near to Sherwood
Forest--who was to know whether behind every tree there did not lurk
Robin Hood or one of his men ? 

One day Robin was walking alone in the wood , and reached a river
spanned by a very narrow bridge , over which one man only could pass . 
In the midst stood a stranger , and Robin bade him go back and let
him go over . "I am no man of yours , " was all the answer Robin got , 
and in anger he drew his bow and fitted an arrow to it , "Would you
shoot a man who has no arms but a staff ? " asked the stranger in
scorn; and with shame Robin laid down his bow , and unbuckled an
oaken stick at his side . "We will fight till one of us falls into
the water , " he said; and fight they did , till the stranger planted a
blow so well that Robin rolled over into the river . "You are a brave
soul , " said he , when he had waded to land , and he blew a blast with
his horn which brought fifty good fellows , clad in green , to the
little bridge . "Have you fallen into the river that your clothes are
wet ? " asked one; and Robin made answer , "No , but this stranger , 
fighting on the bridge , got the better of me , and tumbled me into
the stream . "

At this the foresters seized the stranger , and would have ducked him
had not their leader bade them stop , and begged the stranger to stay
with them and make one of themselves . "Here is my hand , " replied the
stranger , "and my heart with it . My name , if you would know it , is
John Little . "

"That must be altered , " cried Will Scarlett; "we will call a feast , 
and henceforth , because he is full seven feet tall and round the
waist at least an ell , he shall be called Little John . " And thus it
was done; but at the feast Little John , who always liked to know
exactly what work he had to do , put some questions to Robin Hood . 
"Before I join hands with you , tell me first what sort of life is
this you lead ? How am I to know whose goods I shall take , and whose
I shall leave ? Whom I shall beat , and whom I shall refrain from
beating ? "

And Robin answered: "Look that you harm not any tiller of the
ground , nor any yeoman of the greenwood--no knight , no squire , 
unless you have heard him ill spoken of . But if bishops or
archbishops come your way , see that you spoil them , and mark that
you always hold in your mind the High Sheriff of Nottingham . "

This being settled , Robin Hood declared Little John to be second in
command to himself among the brotherhood of the forest , and the new
outlaw never forgot to "hold in his mind" the High Sheriff of
Nottingham , who was the bitterest enemy the foresters had . 

THE BALLAD OF ROBIN HOOD , THE BUTCHER AND THE SHERIFF . 

Upon a time it chanced so , 
 Bold Robin in forest did spy
 A jolly butcher , with a bonny fine mare , 
 With his flesh to the market did hie . 

"Good morrow , good fellow , " said jolly Robin , 
 "What food hast thou ? tell unto me;
 Thy trade to me tell , and where thou dost dwell , 
 For I like well thy company . "

The butcher he answer'd jolly Robin , 
 "No matter where I dwell;
 For a butcher I am , and to Nottingham
 I am going , my flesh to sell . "

"What's the price of thy flesh ? " said jolly Robin , 
 "Come , tell it soon unto me;
 And the price of thy mare , be she never so dear , 
 For a butcher fain would I be . "

"The price of my flesh , " the butcher replied , 
 "I soon will tell unto thee;
 With my bonny mare , and they are not dear , 
 Four marks thou must give unto me . "

"Four marks I will give thee , " said jolly Robin , 
 "Four marks shall be thy fee;
 The money come count , and let me mount , 
 For a butcher I fain would be . "

Now Robin he is to Nottingham gone , 
 His butcher's trade to begin;
 With good intent to the Sheriff he went , 
 And there he took up his inn . 

When other butchers did open their meat , 
 Bold Robin got gold and fee , 
 For he sold more meat for one penny
 Than others did sell for three . 

Which made the butchers of Nottingham
 To study as they did stand , 
 Saying , "Surely he is some prodigal
 That has sold his father's land . "

"This is a mad blade , " the butchers still said;
 Said the Sheriff , "He is some prodigal , 
 That some land has sold for silver and gold , 
 And now he doth mean to spend all . 

"Hast thou any horn-beasts , " the Sheriff asked , 
 "Good fellow , to sell to me ? "
 "Yes , that I have , good Master Sheriff , 
 I have hundreds , two or three . 

"And a hundred acres of good free land , 
 If you please it to see:
 And I'll make you as good assurance of it , 
 As ever my father made me . "

The Sheriff he saddled his good palfrey , 
 And with three hundred pounds of gold , 
 Away he went with bold Robin Hood , 
 His horned beasts to behold . 

Away then the Sheriff and Robin did ride , 
 To the forest of merry Sherwood;
 Then the Sheriff did say , "God keep us this day
 From a man they call Robin Hood . "

But when a little farther they came , 
 Bold Robin he chanced to spy
 A hundred head of good red deer , 
 Come tripping the Sheriff full nigh . 

"How like you my horn-beasts , good Master Sheriff ? 
 They be fat and fair to see";
 "I tell thee , good fellow , I would I were gone , 
 For I like not thy company . "

Then Robin set his horn to his mouth , 
 And blew but blasts three;
 Then quickly anon there came Little John , 
 And all his company . 

"What is your will ? " then said Little John , 
 "Good master , come tell unto me";
 "I have brought hither the Sheriff of Nottingham
 This day to dine with thee , "

Then Robin took his cloak from his back
 And laid it upon the ground;
 And out of the Sheriff's portmanteau
 He took three hundred pound . 

He then led the Sheriff through the wood , 
 And set him on his dapple grey;
 "Commend Robin Hood to your wife at home , "
 He said , and went laughing away . 

Now Robin Hood had no liking for a company of idle men about him , 
and sent off Little John and Will Scarlett to the great road known
as Watling Street , with orders to hide among the trees and wait till
some adventure might come to them; and if they took captive earl or
baron , abbot or knight , he was to be brought unharmed back to Robin
Hood . 

But all along Watling Street the road was bare; white and hard it
lay in the sun , without the tiniest cloud of dust to show that a
rich company might be coming: east and west the land lay still . 

At length , just where a side path turned into the broad highway , 
there rode a knight , and a sorrier man than he never sat a horse on
summer day . One foot only was in the stirrup , the other hung
carelessly by his side; his head was bowed , the reins dropped loose , 
and his horse went on as he would . At so sad a sight the hearts of
the outlaws were filled with pity , and Little John fell on his knees
and bade the knight welcome in the name of his master . 

"Who is your master ? " asked the knight . 

"Robin Hood , " answered Little John . 

"I have heard much good of him , " replied the knight , "and will go
with you gladly . "

Then they all set off together , tears running down the knight's
cheeks as he rode , but he said nothing , neither was anything said to
him . And in this wise they came to Robin Hood . 

"Welcome , Sir Knight , " cried he , "and thrice welcome , for I waited
to break my fast till you or some other had come to me . "

"God save you , good Robin , " answered the knight , and after they had
washed themselves in the stream they sat down to dine off bread , 
with flesh of the King's deer , and swans and pheasants . "Such a
dinner have I not had for three weeks and more , " said the knight . 
"And if I ever come again this way , good Robin , I will give you as
fine a dinner as you have given me . "

"I thank you , " replied Robin , "my dinner is always welcome; still , I
am none so greedy but I can wait for it . But before you go , pay me , 
I pray you , for the food which you have had . It was never the custom
for a yeoman to pay for a knight . "

"My bag is empty , " said the knight , "save for ten shillings only . "

"Go , Little John , and look in his wallet , " said Robin , "and , Sir
Knight , if in truth you have no more , not one penny will I take;
nay , I will give you all that you shall need . "

So Little John spread out the knight's mantle , and opened the bag , 
and therein lay ten shillings and naught besides . 

"What tidings , Little John ? " cried his master . 

"Sir , the knight speaks truly , " said Little John . 

"Then tell me , Sir Knight , whether it is your own ill doings which
have brought you to this sorry pass . "

"For an hundred years my fathers have dwelt in the forest , " answered
the knight , "and four hundred pounds might they spend yearly . But
within two years misfortune has befallen me , and my wife and
children also . "

"How did this evil come to pass ? " asked Robin . 

"Through my own folly , " answered the knight , "and because of my
great love I bore my son , who would never be guided of my counsel , 
and slew , ere he was twenty years old , a knight of Lancaster and his
squire . For their deaths I had to pay a large sum , which I could not
raise without giving my lands in pledge to the rich Abbot of St . 
Mary's . If I cannot bring him the money by a certain day they will
be lost to me for ever . "

"What is the sum ? " asked Robin . "Tell me truly . "

"It is four hundred pounds , " said the knight . 

"And what will you do if you lose your lands ? " asked Robin again . 

"Hide myself over the sea , " said the knight , "and bid farewell to my
friends and country . There is no better way open to me . "

At this tears fell from his eyes , and he turned him to depart . "Good
day , my friend , " he said to Robin , "I cannot pay you what I should--"
But Robin held him fast . "Where are your friends ? " asked he . 

"Sir , they have all forsaken me since I became poor , and they turn
away their heads if we meet upon the road , though when I was rich
they were ever in my castle . "

When Little John and Will Scarlett and the rest heard this they wept
for very shame and fury . 

"Little John , " said Robin , "go to my treasure chest , and bring me
thence four hundred pounds . And be sure you count it truly . "

So Little John went , and Will Scarlett , and they brought back the
money . 

"Sir , " said Little John , when Robin had counted it and found it no
more and no less , "look at his clothes , how thin they are ! You have
stores of garments , green and scarlet , in your coffers-no merchant
in England can boast the like . I will measure some out with my bow . "
And thus he did . 

"Master , " spoke Little John again , "there is still something else . 
You must give him a horse , that he may go as beseems his quality to
the Abbey . "

"Take the grey horse , " said Robin , "and put a new saddle on it , and
take likewise a good palfrey and a pair of boots , with gilt spurs on
them . And as it were a shame for a knight to ride by himself on this
errand , I will lend you Little John as squire--perchance he may
stand you in yeoman's stead . "

"When shall we meet again ? " asked the knight . 

"This day twelve months , " said Robin , "under the greenwood tree . "

Then the knight rode on his way , with Little John behind him , and as
he went he thought of Robin Hood and his men , and blessed them for
the goodness they had shown towards him . 

"To-morrow , " he said to Little John , "I must be at the Abbey of St . 
Mary , which is in the city of York , for if I am but so much as a day
late my lands are lost for ever , and though I were to bring the
money I should not be suffered to redeem them . "

Now the Abbot had been counting the days as well as the knight , and
the next morning he said to his monks: "This day year there came a
knight and borrowed of me four hundred pounds , giving his lands in
surety . And if he come not to pay his debt ere midnight tolls they
will be ours forever . "

"It is full early yet , " answered the Prior , "he may still be
coming . "

"He is far beyond the sea , " said the Abbot , "and suffers from hunger
and cold . How is he to get here ? "

"It were a shame , " said the Prior , "for you to take his lands . And
you do him much wrong if you drive such a hard bargain . "

"He is dead or hanged , " spake a fat-headed monk who was the
cellarer , "and we shall have his four hundred pounds to spend on our
gardens and our wines , " and he went with the Abbot to attend the
court of justice wherein the knight's lands would he declared
forfeited by the High Justiciar . 

"If he come not this day , " cried the Abbot , rubbing his hands , "if
he come not this day , they will be ours . "

"He will not come yet , " said the Justiciar , but he knew not that the
knight was already at the outer gate , and Little John with him . 

"Welcome , Sir Knight , " said the porter . "The horse that you ride is
the noblest that ever I saw . Let me lead them both to the stable , 
that they may have food and rest . "

"They shall not pass these gates , " answered the knight , sternly , and
he entered the hall alone , where the monks were sitting at meat , and
knelt down and bowed to them . 

"I have come back , my lord , " he said to the Abbot , who had just
returned from the court . "I have come back this day as I promised . "

"Have you brought my money ? What do you here without it ? " cried the
Abbot in angry tones . 

"I have come to pray you for a longer day , " answered the knight , 
meekly . 

"The day was fixed and cannot be gainsaid , " replied the Justiciar;
"I am with the Abbot . "

"Good Sir Abbot , be my friend , " prayed the knight again , "and give
me one chance more to get the money and free my lands . I will serve
you day and night till I have four hundred pounds to redeem them . "

But the Abbot only swore a great oath , and vowed that the money must
be paid that day or the lands be forfeited . 

The knight stood up straight and tall: "It is well , " said he , "to
prove one's friends against the hour of need , " and he looked the
Abbot full in the face , and the Abbot felt uneasy , he did not know
why , and hated the knight more than ever . "Out of my hall , false
knight ! " cried he , pretending to a courage which he did not feel . 
But the knight stayed where he was , and answered him , "You lie , 
Abbot . Never was I false , and that I have shown in jousts and in
tourneys . "

"Give him two hundred pounds more , " said the Justiciar to the Abbot , 
"and keep the lands yourself . "

"No , by Heaven ! " answered the knight , "not if you offered me a
thousand pounds would I do it ! Neither Justiciar , abbot , nor monk
shall be heir of mine . " Then he strode up to a table and emptied out
four hundred pounds . "Take your gold , Sir Abbot , which you lent to
me a year agone . Had you but received me civilly , I would have paid
you something more . 

 "Sir Abbot , and ye men of law , 
 Now have I kept my day ! 
 Now shall I have my land again , 
 For aught that you may say . "

So he passed out of the hall singing merrily , leaving the Abbot
staring silently after him , and rode back to his house in Verisdale , 
where his wife met him at the gate . 

 "Welcome , my lord , " said his lady , 
 "Sir , lost is all your good . "
 "Be merry , dame , " said the knight , 
 "And pray for Robin Hood . 

But for his kindness , we would have been beggars . "

After this the knight dwelt at home , looking after his lands and
saving his money carefully till the four hundred pounds lay ready
for Robin Hood . Then he bought a hundred bows and a hundred arrows , 
and every arrow was an ell long , and had a head of silver and
peacock's feathers . And clothing himself in white and red , and with
a hundred men in his train , he set off to Sherwood Forest . 

On the way he passed an open space near a bridge where there was a
wrestling , and the knight stopped and looked , for he himself had
taken many a prize in that sport . Here the prizes were such as to
fill any man with envy; a fine horse , saddled and bridled , a great
white bull , a pair of gloves , and a ring of bright red gold . There
was not a yeoman present who did not hope to win one of them . But
when the wrestling was over , the yeoman who had beaten them all was
a man who kept apart from his fellows , and was said to think much of
himself . Therefore the men grudged him his skill , and set upon him
with blows , and would have killed him , had not the knight , for love
of Robin Hood , taken pity on him , while his followers fought with
the crowd , and would not suffer them to touch the prizes a better
man had won . 

When the wrestling was finished the knight rode on , and there under
the greenwood tree , in the place appointed , he found Robin Hood and
his merry men waiting for him , according to the tryst that they had
fixed last year:

 "God save thee , Robin Hood , 
 And all this company . "
 "Welcome be thou , gentle knight , 
 And right welcome to me . "

 "Hast thou thy land again ? " said Robin , 
 "Truth then thou tell me . "
 "Yea , for God , " said the knight , 
 "And that thank I God and thee . "


 "Have here four hundred pounds , " said the knight , 
 "The which you lent to me;
 And here are also twenty marks
 For your courtesie . "

But Robin would not take the money . Then he noticed the bows and
arrows which the knight had brought , and asked what they were . "A
poor present to you , " answered the knight , and Robin , who would not
be outdone , sent Little John once more to his treasury , and bade him
bring forth four hundred pounds , which was given to the knight . 
After that they parted , in much love , and Robin prayed the knight if
he were in any strait "to let him know at the greenwood tree , and
while there was any gold there he should have it . "

Now the King had no mind that Robin Hood should do as he willed , and
called his knights to follow him to Nottingham , where they would lay
plans how best to take captive the felon . Here they heard sad tales
of Robin's misdoings , and how of the many herds of wild deer that
had been wont to roam the forest in some places scarce one remained . 
This was the work of Robin Hood and his merry men , on whom the king
swore vengeance with a great oath . 

"I would I had this Robin Hood in my hands , " cried he , "and an end
should soon be put to his doings . " So spake the King; but an old
knight , full of days and wisdom , answered him and warned him that
the task of taking Robin Hood would be a sore one , and best let
alone . The King , who had seen the vanity of his hot words the moment
that he had uttered them , listened to the old man , and resolved to
bide his time , if perchance some day Robin should fall into his
power . 

All this time and for six weeks later that he dwelt in Nottingham
the King could hear nothing of Robin , who seemed to have vanished
into the earth with his merry men , though one by one the deer were
vanishing too ! 

At last one day a forester came to the King , and told him that if he
would see Robin he must come with him and take five of his best
knights . The King eagerly sprang up to do his bidding , and the six
men clad in monk's clothes mounted their palfreys and rode down to
the Abbey , the King wearing an Abbot's broad hat over his crown and
singing as he passed through the greenwood . 

Suddenly at the turn of the path Robin and his archers appeared
before them . 

"By your leave , Sir Abbot , " said Robin , seizing the King's bridle , 
"you will stay a while with us . Know that we are yeomen , who live
upon the King's deer , and other food have we none . Now you have
abbeys and churches , and gold in plenty; therefore give us some of
it , in the name of holy charity . "

"I have no more than forty pounds with me , " answered the King , "but
sorry I am it is not a hundred , for you should have had it all . "

So Robin took the forty pounds , and gave half to his men , and then
told the King he might go on his way . "I thank you , " said the King , 
"but I would have you know that our liege lord has bid me bear you
his seal , and pray you to come to Nottingham . "

At this message Robin bent his knee . 

 "I love no man in all the world
 So well as I do my King , "

he cried , "and , Sir Abbot , for thy tidings , which fill my heart with
joy , to-day thou shalt dine with me , for love of my King . " Then he
led the King into an open place , and Robin took a horn and blew it
loud , and at its blast seven-score of young men came speedily to do
his will . 

"They are quicker to do his bidding than my men are to do mine , "
said the King to himself . 

Speedily the foresters set out the dinner , venison and white bread , 
and Robin and Little John served the King . "Make good cheer , Abbot , 
for charity , " said Robin , "and then you shall see what sort of life
we lead , that so you may tell our King . "

When he had finished eating the archers took their bows , and hung
rose-garlands up with a string , and every man was to shoot through
the garland . If he failed , he should have a buffet on the head from
Robin . 

Good bowmen as they were , few managed to stand the test . Little John
and Will Scarlett , and Much , all shot wide of the mark , and at
length no one was left in but Robin himself and Gilbert of the White
Hand . Then Robin fired his last bolt , and it fell three fingers from
the garland . "Master , " said Gilbert , "you have lost , stand forth and
take your punishment . "

"I will take it , " answered Robin , "but , Sir Abbot , I pray you that I
may suffer it at your hands . "

The King hesitated . "It did not become him , " he said , "to smite such
a stout yeoman , " but Robin bade him smite on; so he turned up his
sleeve , and gave Robin such a buffet on the head that he rolled upon
the ground . 

"There is pith in your arm , " said Robin . "Come , shoot a-main with
me . " And the King took up a bow , and in so doing his hat fell back
and Robin saw his face . 

"My lord the King of England , now I know you well , " cried he , and he
fell on his knees and all the outlaws with him . "Mercy I ask , my
lord the King , for my men and me . "

"Mercy I grant , " then said the King , "and therefore I came hither , 
to bid you and your men leave the greenwood and dwell in my court
with me . "

"So it shall be , " answered Robin , "I and my men will come to your
court , and see how your service liketh us . "

"Have you any green cloth , " asked the King , "that you could sell to
me ? " and Robin brought out thirty yards and more , and clad the King
and his men in coats of Lincoln green . "Now we will all ride to
Nottingham , " said he , and they went merrily , shooting by the way . 

The people of Nottingham saw them coming , and trembled as they
watched the dark mass of Lincoln green drawing near over the fields . 
"I fear lest our King be slain , " whispered one to another , "and if
Robin Hood gets into the town there is not one of us whose life is
safe"; and every man , woman , and child made ready to fly . 

The King laughed out when he saw their fright , and called them back . 
Right glad were they to hear his voice , and they feasted and made
merry . A few days later the King returned to London , and Robin dwelt
in his court for twelve months . By that time he had spent a hundred
pounds , for he gave largely to the knights and squires he met , and
great renown he had for his openhandedness . 

But his men who had been born under the shadow of the forest , could
not live amid streets and houses . One by one they slipped away , till
only little John and Will Scarlett were left . Then Robin himself
grew home-sick , and at the sight of some young men shooting thought
upon the time when he was accounted the best archer in all England , 
and went straightway to the King and begged for leave to go on a
pilgrimage to Bernisdale . 

"I may not say you nay , " answered the King; "seven nights you may be
gone and no more . " And Robin thanked him , and that evening set out
for the greenwood . 

It was early morning when he reached it at last , and listened
thirstily to the notes of singing birds , great and small . 

"It seems long since I was here , " he said to himself; "It would give
me great joy if I could bring down a deer once more , " and he shot a
great hart , and blew his horn , and all the outlaws of the forest
came flocking round him . "Welcome , " they said , "our dear master , 
back to the greenwood tree , " and they threw off their caps and fell
on their knees before him in delight at his return . 

For two and twenty years Robin Hood dwelt in Sherwood forest after
he had run away from court , and naught that the King could say would
tempt him back again . At the end of that time he fell ill; he
neither ate nor drank , and had no care for the things he loved . "I
must go to merry Kirkley , " said he , "and have my blood let . "

But Will Scarlett , who heard his words , spoke roundly to him . "Not
by MY leave , nor without a hundred bowmen at your back . For there
abides an evil man , who is sure to quarrel with you , and you will
need us badly . "

"If you are afraid , Will Scarlett , you may stay at home , for me , "
said Robin , "and in truth no man will I take with me , save Little
John only , to carry my bow . "

"Bear your bow yourself , master , and I will bear mine . "

"Very well , let it be so , " said Robin , and they went on merrily
enough till they came to some women weeping sorely near a stream . 

"What is the matter , good wives ? " said Robin Hood . 

"We weep for Robin Hood and his dear body , which to-day must let
blood , " was the answer . 

"Pray why do you weep for me ? " asked Robin; "the Prioress is the
daughter of my aunt , and well I know she would not do me harm for
all the world . " And he passed on , with Little John at his side . 

Soon they reached the Priory , where they were let in by the Prioress
herself , who bade them welcome heartily , and not the less because
Robin handed her twenty pounds in gold as payment for his stay , and
told her if he cost her more , she was to let him know of it . Then
she began to bleed him , and for long Robin said nothing , giving her
credit for kindness and for knowing her art , but at length so much
blood came from him that he suspected treason . He tried to open the
door , for she had left him alone in the room , but it was locked
fast , and while the blood was still flowing he could not escape from
the casement . So he lay down for many hours , and none came near him , 
and at length the blood stopped . Slowly Robin uprose and staggered
to the lattice-window , and blew thrice on his horn; but the blast
was so low , and so little like what Robin was wont to give , that
Little John , who was watching for some sound , felt that his master
must be nigh to death . 

At this thought he started to his feet , and ran swiftly to the
Priory . He broke the locks of all the doors that stood between him
and Robin Hood , and soon entered the chamber where his master lay , 
white , with nigh all his blood gone from him . 

"I crave a boon of you , dear master , " cried Little John . 

"And what is that boon , " said Robin Hood , "which Little John begs of
me ? " And Little John answered , "It is to burn Kirkley Hall , and all
the nunnery . "

But Robin Hood , in spite of the wrong that had been done him , would
not listen to Little John's cry for revenge . "I never hurt a woman
in all my life , " he said , "nor a man that was in her company . But
now my time is done . That know I well . So give me my bow and a broad
arrow , and wheresoever it falls there shall my grave be digged . Lay
a green sod under my head and another at my feet , and put beside me
my bow , which ever made sweetest music to my ears , and see that
green and gravel make my grave . And , Little John , take care that I
have length enough and breadth enough to lie in . " So Robin he
loosened his last arrow from the string . He then died . And where the
arrow fell Robin was buried . 


