King Richard , with his chief nobles , disembarked at Acre an hour
before noon on the 8th day of June , 1191 . I had the good fortune to
see him without difficulty , by the favour of one who has a charge in
the ordering of the harbour . Nor was this a small thing , for there
was such a press and crowding of men . 

The King was as noble a warrior as ever I have seen . Some that I
have known were taller of stature , but never one that bore himself
more bravely and showed more likelihood of strength and courage . 
They that are learned in such things said that his arms were over-
long for the height of his body; but this is scarce a fault in a
swordsman , another inch of length adding I know not how much of
strength to a blow . He was of a ruddy complexion , his eyes blue , 
with a most uncommon fire in them , such as few could dare to look
into if his wrath was kindled , his countenance , such as befitted a
ruler of men , being of an aspect both generous and commanding . 

Some ten days after his coming to the camp King Richard was taken
with sickness . This was never altogether absent , but it grew worse , 
as might indeed be looked for , in the heats of summer . The King
sickened on the day which the Christians celebrate as the Feast of
St . Barnabas . [: The longest day according to the old
calendar . So the old adage has it:  " Barnaby bright , Barnaby bright;
Longest day and shortest night . " ] I was called to see him , having , 
as I have said , no small fame as a healer . Never have I seen a sick
man more intractable . My medicine he swallowed readily , I may say , 
even greedily . Had I suffered it , he would have taken it at
intervals shorter by far than I ordered . Doubtless he thought that
the more a man has of a good thing , the better it is for him .  ( So
indeed many believe , and of other things besides medicine , but
wholly without reason ) . But in this I hindered him , leaving with
those who ministered to him sufficient for one dose only . 

He was troubled about many things , about the siege , which , as he
justly thought , had already been too much drawn out , about King
Philip of France , whom he loved not nor trusted , about his engines
of war , of which the greater part had not yet reached the camp; the
ships that bore them having been outsailed by the rest of the fleet . 
His fever was of the intermittent sort , coming upon him on alternate
days . On the days when he was whole , or as nearly whole as a man
sick of this ague may ever be , he was busy in the field , causing
such engines as he had to be set in convenient places for the
assault of the town , and in other cares such as fall to a general . 
When he was perforce shut in his pavilion by access of the fever , he
suffered himself to take no rest . Messengers were coming and going
from morning to night with news of the siege--he could never hear
enough of the doings of the French King--and there were always near
him men skilful in the working and making of engines . One would show
him some new thing pictured upon paper; another would bring a little
image , so to speak , of an engine , made in wood or iron . Never was a
child more occupied with a toy than was King Richard with these
things . I am myself no judge of such matters , but I have heard it
said by men well acquainted with them , that the King had a
marvellous understanding of such contrivances . But these cares were
a great hindrance to recovery . So at least I judged , and doubtless
it had been thus in the case of most men . But the King was not as
others , and , as it seemed to me , he drove away his disease by sheer
force of will . 

On a certain evening when King Richard was mending apace of his
fever one carne to his tent--an English knight , Hugh Brown by name--
who brought the news that the King of the French had commanded that
a general assault should be made on the town the very next day . The
King would fain know the cause of this sudden resolve .  " Well , " said
the English knight ,  " it came about , as I understand , in this
fashion . The Turks have this day destroyed two engines of King
Philip on which he had spent much time and gold . "  " Aye ! " said King
Richard ,  " I know the two; the cat and the mantlet . They are pretty
contrivings the both of them , but I set not such store on them as
does my brother of France . " And here I should say that the cat was
like to a tent made of hides long and narrow and low upon the
ground , with a pointed end as it might be a ploughshare , which could
be brought up to the walls by men moving it from within , and so
sheltered from the stones and darts of the enemy . As for the
mantlet , it was made in somewhat the same fashion , only it was less
in size , nor was it to be brought near to the wall . King Philip
loved dearly to sit in it , cross-bow in hand--the French , I noted , 
like rather the cross-bow , the English the long-bow--and would shoot
his bolts at any Turk that might show himself upon the walls . 

But to come back to the knight ' s story .  " An hour or so after noon , 
when the cat had been brought close to the wall , and the mantlet was
in its accustomed place , some fifty yards distant , the Turks made an
attack on both at the same moment of time . On to the cat they
dropped a heavy beam; and when this with its weight had broken in
the roof , or I should rather say the back of the cat , a great
quantity of brushwood , and after the brushwood a whole pailful of
Greek fire [: A composition , supposedly of asphalt , nitre
and sulphur . It burnt under water . ]--the machine was over near to
the wall , so that these things could be dropped on it from above . At
the mantlet they aimed bolts from a strong engine which they had
newly put in place , and by ill luck broke it through . And verily
before the nimblest-tongued priest in the whole realm of England
could say a hunting-mass , both were in a blaze . " 

What the man might mean by the priest and the hunting-mass I knew
not then , but heard after , that when a noble will go forth hunting , 
the service which they call the mass is shortened to the utmost , and
the priest that can say it more speedily than his brethren is best
esteemed . 

 " And my brother of France , " cried the King ,  " how fared he ? "  " He had
as narrow an escape with his life , " answered the knight ,  " as ever
had Christian king . His mantle , nay his very hair was singed , and as
for his cross-bow , he was constrained to leave it behind . "  " And he
gave commands for the assault in his anger ? " said the King .  " ' Tis
even so , " answered Sir Hugh . 

 " My brother of France is , methinks , too greedy of gain and glory; if
he had been willing to ask our help , he had done better . " But King
Richard sorrowed for the brave men , fellow-soldiers of the Cross
with him , who had fallen to no purpose . Nevertheless , in his secret
heart , he was not ill-pleased that the French King had not taken the
town of Acre . 

On the second day after the failure of the French assault upon the
town , King Richard would make his own essay . He was not yet wholly
recovered of his sickness; but it would have passed the wit of man
to devise means by which he could be kept within his pavilion; nor
must it be forgotten that such restraint might have done him more of
harm than of good . So his physicians , for he had those who regularly
waited on him  ( though I make bold to say that he trusted in me
rather than in them ) , gave him the permission which he had taken . He
had caused a mantlet to be built for him which was brought up to the
edge of the ditch with which the town was surrounded . In this he
sat , with a cross-bow in hand , and shot not a few of the enemy , 
being skilful beyond the common in the use of this weapon . But towns
are not taken by the shooting of bolts , howsoever well aimed they
may be . This may not be done save by coming to close quarters . 

It was on the thirty-fourth day after the coming of King Richard
that the town was given up . Proclamation was made throughout the
camp that no one should trespass by deed or word against the
departing Turks . And , indeed , he who would insult men so brave would
be of a poor and churlish spirit . To the last they bore themselves
with great courage and dignity . On the morning of the day of their
departure they dressed themselves in their richest apparel , and
being so drest showed themselves on the walls . This done , they laid
aside their garments , piling them in a great heap in the market-
place , and so marched forth from the town , each clad in his shirt
only , but with a most cheerful contenance . 

When the last of the Turks had left the town the Christian army
entered . Half of it was given to the French king , who had for his
own abode the House of the Templars , and half to King Richard , to
whom was assigned the palace of the Caliph . In like manner the
prisoners and all the treasure were equally divided . 

For one shameful deed the English King must answer . Of this deed I
will now tell the story . When the army had had sufficient rest--and
the King knew well that no army must have more than is sufficient , 
suffering more from excess than from defect in this matter--and it
was now time to advance , there arose a great question touching the
agreement made when the town was given up . There was much going to
and fro of messengers and embassies between the English King and the
Caliph Saladin , much debating , and many accusations bandied to and
fro . Even to this day no man can speak certainly of what was done or
not done in this matter . What I write , I write according to the best
of my knowledge . First , then , it is beyond all doubt that the Caliph
did not send either the Holy Cross or the money which had been
covenanted , or the prisoners whom he had promised to deliver up; but
as to the cause wherefore he did not send them there is no
agreement , the Christians affirming one thing , the followers of
Mahomet another . As to the Holy Cross , let that be put out of the
account . No man that I ever talked with--and I have talked with
many--ever saw it .  ' Tis much to be doubted whether it was in being . 
As to the money , that the Caliph had it , or a great portion of it , 
at hand , is certainly true . It was seen and counted by King
Richard ' s own envoys . As to the prisoners , it is hard to discover
the truth . For my part , I believe that the Caliph was ready to
deliver up all that he had in his own hands or could find elsewhere , 
but that he had promised more in respect of this than he was able to
perform . Many of those whom he had covenanted to restore were dead , 
either of disease or by violence . As for disease , it must be noted
that a sick man was likely to fare worse in the hands of Turks; as
for violence , there was not much diversity between the Christians
and the followers of Mahomet . But this may be said , that one who
invades the land of others is like to suffer worse injury should he
come into their power than he would have the disposition to inflict
upon them . Whatever , then , the cause , the Caliph had engaged in this
matter far more than he was able to perform . But he did not fail
from want of good faith . I take it that it was from the matter of
the money that there came the breaking of the agreement . To put it
very shortly , the Caliph said ,  " Restore to me the hostages and you
shall receive the gold " ; King Richard said ,  " Send on the gold and
you shall receive the hostages . " And neither was the Caliph willing
to trust the good faith of the King , nor the King the good faith of
the Caliph . 

So there was delay after delay , much talk to no purpose , and the
hearts of men , both on one side and on the other , growing more hot
with anger from day to day . And there was also the need which
increased from day to day , as , indeed , it needs must , for the
Christians to be about the business on which they came . They had
taken the town of Acre , but that was but the beginning of their
enterprise , for they had to conquer the whole land . And how could
the army march with a whole multitude of prisoners in their hands ? It
would need no small number of men to keep watch over them , lest they
should escape , or , what was more to be feared , do an injury to the
army . What could be worse in a doubtful battle than that there
should be these enemies in its very midst ? I set these things down
because I would not do an injustice to the English King , whom I have
always held as one to be greatly admired . Nevertheless I say again , 
that in the matter of the prisoners he did a shameful deed . For on
the 20th day of August he commanded that all the prisoners that were
in his hands , whether they had been taken in battle , or delivered up
as hostages for the fulfilment of the covenant , should be led out of
the city and slain . These were in number between two and three
thousand . Some the King kept alive , for whom , as being of high
nobility and great wealth , he hoped to receive a ransom; others were
saved by private persons , a few for compassion ' s sake; and others in
the hope of gain . But the greater part were slain without mercy , the
soldiers falling upon them , without arms and helpless as they were . 

It was soon made plain to all that the spirit of the Caliph and his
Turks was not broken by the losing of Acre . Rather were they stirred
up by it to more earnestness and courage; nor did they forget how
their countrymen had been cruelly slaughtered . For a time they were
content to watch the King ' s army as it went on its way , taking such
occasion as offered itself of plundering or slaying . If any lagged
behind , falling out of the line of march by reason of weariness , or
seeking refreshment on the way , as when there was a spring of water
near to the road , or a vineyard with grapes-- ' twas just the time of
the ripening of grapes--then the Turkish horsemen would be upon him . 
Such loiterers escaped but seldom . And for this business the Turks
had a particular fitness , so quickly did they come and depart . The
Christian knights were clad in armour , a great defense , indeed , 
against arrows and stones , but a great hindrance if a man would move
quickly; the horses also had armour on them . Why do they set men on
horses but that they may go speedily to and fro as occasion may
call ? but these knights are like to fortresses rather than to
riders . A man on foot can easily outrun them; as for the Turks who
rode on horses from the desert--than which there is no creature on
earth lighter and speedier--they flew from the Christian who would
pursue them , as a bird flies from a child who would catch it . 

All this while the Turks were close at hand , and ready to assault
the King ' s army so soon as a convenient occasion would arise . But
they did not take King Richard unaware , for indeed he was as
watchful as he was brave . 

I will now set forth as briefly as may be the order of the army as
it was set out for battle at Arsuf . On the right hand of the army
was the sea , its front being set towards the south . In the van were
the Templars , and next to these the Frenchmen in two divisions , the
second being led by that Guy who called himself King of Jerusalem , 
and after the Frenchmen King Richard with his Englishmen; last of
all , holding the rear-guard , were the Hospitallers . These are ever
rivals of the Templars , and it was the King ' s custom so to order his
disposition that this rivalry should work for the common good . On
one day the Templars would lead , and the Hospitallers bring up the
rear; on another each would take the other ' s place; and there was
ever a mighty contention between the two companies which would bear
itself the better . These two posts , it should be said , were the most
full of peril; nor was any part of the army save only these two
companies suffered to hold either the one or the other . Between the
divisions there was a small space , not more that sufficient to mark
one from the other: otherwise the soldiers stood and marched in as
close array as might be . Also they moved very slowly , travelling
less than a league in the space of two hours . And even the King with
some chosen knights rode up and down the lines , watching at the same
time the Turks , so that whenever they might make assault the army
might be ready to meet them . 

Now King Richard ' s commandment had been that the Christians should
on no account break their lines to attack the enemy , but should only
defend themselves as best they could . There is nothing harder in the
whole duty of a soldier than so to stand; even they who have been
men of war from their youth grow greatly impatient; as for the
younger sort they often fail to endure altogether . Many a man will
sooner throw himself upon almost sure death than abide danger less
by far standing still . And so it could be seen that day in the
Christian army . The first to fail were the men that carried the
cross-bows; nor , indeed , is it to be wondered at that when they had
spent their store of bolts , they , having but short swords wherewith
to defend themselves , should be ill content to hold their place . 
Many I did see throw away their bows and fly , thrusting themselves
by main force into the ranks of the men-at-arms , who liked not to
beat them back , nor yet to suffer them to pass . And they themselves
had much ado to hold their ground , for it was a very fierce assault
that they had to endure . In the first place there was such a shower
of darts and stones and arrows that the very light of the sun itself
was darkened , a thing which I had always before judged to be a
fable , but saw that day to be possible . The greater part of them , it
is true , fell without effect to the ground , for of twenty missiles
scarce one served its purpose , but some were not cast in vain . As
for the number , they lay so thick upon the ground that a man might
gather twenty into his hand without moving from his place . 

About noon the Knights Hospitallers themselves , than whom , as I have
said , there were no braver men in the whole army , sent word to the
King that they could bear up no longer , unless they should be
suffered to charge the enemy . But they got small comfort from the
King .  " Close up your lines , " he said to the messenger ,  " and be
patient . Be sure that you shall not miss your reward . " A second time
did they send to him , the Master of the Company himself going on the
errand , but he also came back with nothing done . Now the King ' s plan
was this , that when the Turks should have spent their strength , and
should also , through over-confidence and contempt of their
adversaries , have fallen into disorder , then the trumpets should
sound , and the whole army with one consent and moving all together , 
so that the whole of its strength should be put , as it were , into
one blow , should fall upon the enemy .  ' Twas a wisely conceived plan , 
save in this that there was needed for the full carrying out more
than the King was like to find . He laid upon his soldiers a greater
burden of patience than they could bear . 

As for the King , he was , I can scarce doubt , glad at heart that the
season of waiting was over . Certain it is that not only did he not
seek to call back his men from the charge--doubtless he knew full
well that to do this was beyond the power of mortal--but he himself
joined in it with the greatest vehemence; none that saw him but must
have believed that the affair was altogether to his liking . If
others were before him at the first , but a short time had passed
when he was to be seen in the front rank , aye , and before it . Where
he rode , it was as if Azrael had passed , for the dead lay upon the
ground on either side . 

Never had the Caliph Saladin suffered so great a defeat as that
which fell upon him in the battle of Arsuf; never , indeed , after
that day did he dare to meet King Richard in the open field . 
Nevertheless , from that very day did the hope of the Christians that
they should accomplish the end of their warfare grow less and less . 
But , if any one ask what was the cause of this falling , and who
should bear the blame , I , for one , know not what answer should be
made to him . There was not one in the whole army more brave and more
generous in this matter than King Richard; yet even he , I hold , had
not a wholly single heart . He was ever thinking of worldly things;
he desired greatly to win the city of Jerusalem , yet he desired it
as much for his own sake , for his own glory and renown , and the
increase of his royal power , as for any other cause . 

There is no need to tell of all the combats , skirmishes , and the
like that took place , how on one day a company of the Templars fell
into an ambush , how on another the Hospitallers suffered some
damage . For the most part the Christians had the better in these
things , and this not a little because of the great skill and valour
of the English King . Nevertheless , the fortunes of the army seemed
to go backwards rather than forwards . 

About this time the King began to have dealings for peace with the
Caliph Saladin , sending an embassage to him , and receiving the like
from him . But it was ever thus that the King asked more than he
looked for the Caliph to give; and the Caliph promised more than he
had the purpose to fulfil . There were many courtesies passed between
them , and gifts also . King Richard would send a set of hawks , and , 
indeed , he had not much that he could give; but the presents that
came from the Caliph were of exceeding richness and splendour; there
was a tent made of cloth of gold , and horses such as Kings only have
in their stalls , and rare beasts and birds , and snow from Lebanon , 
for the cooling of wines , and many other things , both for show and
for use , of which it were long to tell . And these things , for all
that they were costly , served the Caliph ' s purpose well , and for
this reason , they seemed to show his good will , and all the while he
was busy destroying the towns and laying waste the country . Of these
things the King heard something , but not all , for in the matter of
news he was ill served . And all the while the Turks ceased not to do
all the mischief that they could , slaying such as strayed from the
camp , yea , and coming into the camp itself , and doing men to death
in their very tents , and Saladin , or rather Saphadin , his brother , 
for he it was who held converse with King Richard , when complaints
were made of their deeds , affirmed that they were done by robbers
and others who were not subject to him , and paid no reverence to his
commands; of which pretence there need be said this only , that these
robbers or murderers , whether they were the Caliph ' s men or no , 
never harmed any but such as were his enemies . 

For all this King Richard still strove by all means that he could
devise to come to a peaceful agreement with his adversaries . Nor did
he refuse any instrument by which he might hope to compass this end . 

When a whole moon had been wasted in parleying and the sending of
messengers to and fro , the King , seeing that he must accomplish his
purpose by force of arms or not at all , led his army towards the
Holy City . It would serve no profitable end to tell of the other
places where he pitched his camp , or of the days which he tarried in
this or that . Let it suffice to say that in a month ' s time he
traversed so much space only as an army well equipped might pass
over in a single day ' s march; and that about twenty-one days after
the winter solstice the army of the Christians came to a certain
place which is named the Casal of Beitenoble , and which in ancient
times was , if I err not , a city of the priests . There it tarried
some twelve days , being much troubled by storms and rains , for the
winds blew and the rains fell during the whole of this time , in such
a fashion as I have never seen . As for the tents , only such as were
appointed with ropes and so forth could be kept in their place , so
violent were the blasts , so that the greater part of the army lay
under the open sky , not a little to the damage of their health . The
horses also were in evil case . These creatures , all men know , suffer
from much sickness , and multitudes of them perished . Also there was
a great scarcity of victuals; for the corn and even the biscuit were
spoilt by the rain , and the hogs ' flesh grew corrupt . 

Though not a few died of sickness , yet did the host daily grow
greater . Many who had stayed behind in various cities , their zeal
having grown stale , now came back to the camp , judging that they
would do well to take part in an enterprise that was now near to
success . Also many that had tarried on the march for the cause of
sickness now made shift to come to the camp . Some I saw carried in
litters , and others that could scarce set one foot before the other
crawled painfully along the road . Many of these were slain by the
Turks , but not the less did the rest brave the dangers of the
journey . And in the camp there was a great furbishing of arms and
armour , and trimming of the plumes of helmets , for it was counted an
unseemly thing that any man should enter such a place as the Holy
City save in his best array . 

On a certain evening , some eleven days after the coming of the army
to Beitenoble , there was a council held in the tent of King Richard , 
at which were present the Master of the Templars and the Master of
the Hospitallers , and other chief men in the army . About an hour
after sunset the council came to an end; darkness had long since
fallen , but it chanced to be full moon , and the faces of them that
had been present at the council were plain to be seen . Before ever a
word was said , it was manifest to all that a great misfortune had
befallen them . For the faces of these men were clouded with
discouragement . And straightway all the multitude that had been
gathered together departed every man to his own place . There needed
no proclaiming that neither on the morrow nor on any other day would
there be a marching to the Holy City . 

On the 8th day of January the army departed from Beitenoble , and on
the 20th it came , after much toil and suffering , for the rain and
tempest scarcely abated for a single hour through the twelve days , 
to the city of Ascalon . 

For some little time , King Richard and his army dwelt in peace in
the city of Ascalon . Nor can it be denied that they gathered
strength; the sick , being duly handled by their physicians , were
restored to a sound body , and they that were wearied with the
labours of long-continued warfare had rest and refreshment . 
Nevertheless it may be doubted whether the King was able to
advance the cause at all which he had in hand , namely , the taking of
the Holy City . And the chief cause was this , that the Christians , 
not having for the present a common foe with whom to contend , began
to quarrel among themselves more grievously than ever . So the King
and the French , among whom , now that the French King had departed to
his own land , a certain Duke of Burgundy was chief , fell out , and
this with such heat , that the duke departed from Ascalon to Acre in
great haste , and all the Frenchmen followed him . 

Now about this same time there came a messenger to King Richard
bearing a letter from one that he had set to rule in England in his
stead while he should be absent from his kingdom . In this letter
there were written many things about the doings of Prince John the
King ' s brother: how he had commerce with the French to the King ' s
damage , and was troubling all loyal men , and had taken all the money
that was in the treasury . When the King heard these things he was
sore distraught . And indeed he was in a great strait . On the one
hand there was the purpose for which he had come on his present
journey , the taking again of the Holy City; and , on the other , there
was the loss of his own kingdom at home . For in the letter it was
plainly written that if he was not speedy in returning , all the
realm of England would be lost to him . 

At the first he made no doubt of departing with but as little delay
as might be .  " I must be gone , " he said ,  " or my kingdom will not be
worth a silver penny . " But before many days his purpose was changed . 
 ' Twas said that a holy man , a priest of the land of France , took
courage to speak to him and set before him his duty in this matter . 
He said that the hearts of all were sorely troubled by the King ' s
purpose to depart--and this was most certainly true , seeing that
they who were most jealous of the King and chafed most at his
command were not less dismayed by the news of his departure than
were his best friends .  " Think too , " he is reported to have spoken , 
 " how that you will greatly dim your kingly renown . You have done
well , O King , and God has manifestly bestowed His blessings on you . 
Will you then be ungrateful , and , if your royal grace will suffer me
to say so much , unfaithful to Him ? Verily there is a great reward
laid up for him that recovers the Holy City out of the hands of the
heathen , and will you give this up on the bare rumour of mischief
that may befall your estate in this world ? " So the holy man is
reported to have spoken . Such words may have had weight with the
King , who was ever greatly moved by eloquent words . But I also
believe that when he came to himself he judged that there was no
great need of haste in the matter; that the Prince John his brother
was not greatly loved , nor was ever like to be; that when the people
of England had had a year ' s trial of his rule , if such should come
to pass , they would be the less likely to stand by him; and , 
moreover , that if Richard should go back to his country in high
esteem among all men , as having set up yet again a Christian Kingdom
in the Holy City , his enemies would be brought nought by the mere
rumour of his coming . Certain it is that , let the cause be what it
might , he caused it to be made known throughout the army that they
would set out for the Holy City in three days ' time . 

Again there was great joy in the army; again the sick rose from
their beds , and the lame threw away there crutches , that they might
go without hindrance on this great journey . Again did the army come
almost in sight of the Holy City; again were all things ready for
the assault . And then once more the more skilful and prudent of the
leaders hindered the matter . It was not well , they said to run into
such danger . It might well be that if they should assail the city
they would not take it; it was well-nigh certain that even if they
should take it , they could not hold it to any good purpose . And so
it came to pass that King Richard and the army having once more come
to Beitenoble , once more departed , leaving their task
unaccomplished . 

When the leaders had taken this resolve that they would turn back
and the army was now about to depart , there came to King Richard a
certain man-at-arms , who was well acquainted with the country , for
indeed , he had travelled on foot as a pilgrim from the coast to
Jerusalem , and this not once only but twice or thrice . This man
said ,  " My lord King , if you are minded to see the Holy City , you can
do so at little pains . If you will ride a mile or so you will come
to a hill from whence you can see the walls , and the hill on which
the temple was built and other of the Holy places . " But the King
answered ,  " I thank you much , nor , indeed , is there any sight in the
whole world on which I would more gladly look with my eyes , but I am
not worthy of so great a favour . If it had been the will of God that
I should see His city , I do not doubt that I had done so , not as one
who looks upon some spectacle from far , but as the conqueror in some
great battle looks upon the thing that he has won . But of this grace
I , by reason I doubt not of my sins , have been judged unworthy . " And
when he had so spoken he turned his horse ' s head to the west , as
being minded to return yet again to the sea-coast . And this he did . 

I have spoken of the King ' s courage and skill in arms and wisdom in
leadership , nor need I say these things again . But one thing I will
add , namely , that of all the men that came to this land from the
West none left behind him so great a fame as did King Richard . So if
a mother was minded to make a crying child hold his peace , she would
say ,  " Hush , child , or King Richard shall have thee " ; or if a horse
started unaware , his rider would say ,  " Dost see King Richard in the
bush ? " 

On the 9th day of October , 1192 , did King Richard set sail to return
to his own country . But it fared ill with him on his journey . For it
fell out that he was separated from all his friends , and that when
he was in this case a certain duke , with whom he had had a strife , 
laid hands upon him , and laid him in prison . There he remained for
the space of a year and more , fretting much , I doubt not , against
his condition , for never surely was a man more impatient of bonds . 
But he could not escape , nor did his friends so much as know where
he was . And when this was discovered by some strange chance , there
was yet much delay , nor indeed was he set free till there had been
paid for him a ransom of many thousands of gold pieces . Not many
years after he was slain by a chance arrow shot from the walls of a
certain castle which he was besieging , being then in the forty-
second year of his age . 


