I hope you have not forgotten , my dear child , that all the cruel
wars of Scotland arose out of the debate between the great lords who
claimed the throne after King Alexander the Third ' s death . The
Scottish nobility rashly submitted the decision of that matter to
King Edward I of England , and thus opened the way to his
endeavouring to seize the kingdom of Scotland to himself . It was
natural that such of the people as were still determined to fight
for the deliverance of their country from the English , should look
round for some other King , under whom they might unite themselves , 
to combat the power of England . 

Amongst these , the principal candidates , were two powerful noblemen . 
The first was Robert Bruce , Earl of Carrick; the other was John
Comyn , or Cuming , of Badenoch , usually called the Red Comyn , to
distinguish him from his kinsman , the Black Comyn , so named from his
swarthy complexion . These two great and powerful barons had taken
part with Sir William Wallace in the wars against England; but , 
after his defeat , being careful of losing their great estates , and
considering the freedom of Scotland as beyond the possibility of
being recovered , both Bruce and Comyn had not only submitted
themselves to Edward , and acknowledged his title as King of
Scotland , but even borne arms , along with the English , against such
of their countrymen as still continued to resist the usurper . But
the feelings of Bruce concerning the baseness of this conduct , are
said , by the old tradition of Scotland , to have been awakened by the
following incident . In one of the numerous battles , or skirmishes , 
which took place at the time between the English and their adherents
on the one side , and the insurgent or patriotic Scots upon the
other , Robert the Bruce was present , and assisted the English to
gain the victory . After the battle was over , he sat down to dinner
among his southern friends and allies , without washing his hands , on
which there still remained spots of the blood which he had shed
during the action . The English lords , observing this whispered to
each other in mockery ,  " Look at that Scotsman , who is eating his own
blood ! " Bruce heard what they said , and began to reflect that the
blood upon his hands might be indeed called his own , since it was
that of his brave countrymen who were fighting for the independence
of Scotland , whilst he was assisting its oppressors , who only
laughed at and mocked him for his unnatural conduct . He was so much
shocked and disgusted that he arose from table , and , going into a
neighbouring chapel , shed many tears , and , asking pardon of God for
the great crime he had been guilty of , made a solemn vow that he
would atone for it by doing all in his power to deliver Scotland
from the foreign yoke . Accordingly , he left , it is said , the English
army , and never joined it again , but remained watching an
opportunity for restoring the freedom of his country . 

Now , this Robert the Bruce was held the best warrior in Scotland . He
was very wise and prudent , and an excellent general; that is , he
knew how to conduct an army , and place them in order for battle , as
well or better than any great man of his time . He was generous , too , 
and courteous by nature; but he had some faults , which perhaps
belonged as much to the fierce period in which he lived as to his
own character . He was rash and passionate , and in his passion he was
sometimes relentless and cruel . 

Robert the Brace had fixed his purpose , as I told you , to attempt
once again to drive the English out of Scotland , and he desired to
prevail upon Sir John , the Red Comyn , who was his rival in his
pretensions to the throne , to join with him in expelling the foreign
enemy by their common efforts . With this purpose , Bruce requested an
interview with John Comyn . They met in the Church of the Minorites
in Dunfries , before the high altar . What passed betwixt them is not
known with certainty; but they quarrelled , either concerning their
mutual pretensions to the Crown , or because Comyn refused to join
Bruce in the proposed insurrection against the English; or , as many
writers say , because Bruce charged Comyn with having betrayed to the
English his purpose of rising up against King Edward . It is , 
however , certain , that these two haughty barons came to high and
abusive words , until at length Bruce forgot the sacred character of
the place in which they stood , and struck Comyn a blow with his
dagger . Having done this rash deed , he instantly ran out of the
church and called for his horse . Two friends of Bruce were in
attendance on him . Seeing him pale , bloody , and in much agitation
they eagerly inquired what was the matter . 

 " I doubt , " said Bruce ,  " that I have slain the Red Comyn . " 

 " Do you leave such a matter in doubt ? " said one ,  " I will make
sicker ! " --that is , I will make certain . Accordingly , he and his
companion rushed into the church and made the matter certain with a
vengeance , by dispatching the wounded Comyn with their daggers . His
uncle , Sir Robert Comyn , was slain at the same time . 

This slaughter of Comyn was a rash and cruel action . It was followed
by the displeasure of Heaven; for no man ever went through more
misfortunes than Robert Bruce , although he at length rose to great
honour . After the deed was done , Bruce might be called desperate . He
had committed an action which was sure to bring down upon him the
vengeance of all Comyn ' s relations , the resentment of the King of
England , and the displeasure of the Church , on account of having
slain his enemy within consecrated ground . He determined , therefore , 
to bid them all defiance at once , and to assert his pretensions to
the throne of Scotland . He drew his own followers together , summoned
to meet him such barons as still entertained hopes of the freedom of
the country , and was crowned King at the Abbey of Scone , the usual
place where the Kings of Scotland assumed their authority . 

Everything relating to the ceremony was hastily performed . A small
circlet of gold was hurriedly made , to represent the ancient crown
of Scotland , which Edward had carried off to England . The Earl of
Fife , descendant of the brave Macduff , whose duty it was to have
placed the crown on the King ' s head , would not give his attendance , 
but the ceremonial was performed by his sister , Isabella , Countess
of Buchan . 

Edward was dreadfully incensed when he heard that , after all the
pains which he had taken , and all the blood which had been spilled , 
the Scots were making this new attempt to shake off his authority . 
Though now old , feeble , and sickly , he made a solemn vow , in
presence of all his court , that he would take the most ample
vengeance upon Robert the Bruce and his adherents; after which he
would never again draw his sword upon a Christian , but would only
fight against the unbelieving Saracens for the recovery of the Holy
Land . He marched against Bruce accordingly , at the head of a
powerful army . 

The commencement of Bruce ' s undertaking was most disastrous . He was
crowned on the twenty-ninth of March , 1306 . On the eighteenth of May
he was ex-communicated by the Pope , on account of the murder of
Comyn within consecrated ground , a sentence which excluded him from
all benefits of religion , and authorized any one to kill him . 
Finally , on the nineteenth of June , the new King was completely
defeated near Methven by the English Earl of Pembroke . Robert ' s
horse was killed under him in the action , and he was for a moment a
prisoner . But he had fallen into the power of a Scottish knight , 
who , though he served in the English army , did not choose to be the
instrument of putting Bruce into their hands , and allowed him to
escape . 

Bruce , with a few brave adherents , among whom was the young lord of
Douglas , who was afterward called the Good Lord James , retired into
the Highland mountains . The Bruce ' s wife , now Queen of Scotland , 
with several other ladies , accompanied her husband and his few
followers during their wanderings . There was no way of providing for
them save by hunting and fishing . Driven from one place in the
Highlands to another , starved out of some districts , and forced from
others by the opposition of the inhabitants , Bruce attempted to
force his way into Lorn; but he found enemies everywhere . The
MacDougals , a powerful family , then called Lords of Lorn , were
friendly to the English , and attacked Bruce and his wandering
companions as soon as they attempted to enter their territory . The
chief , called John of Lorn , hated Bruce on account of his having
slain the Red Comyn , to whom this MacDougal was nearly related . 
Bruce was again defeated by this chief . He directed his men to
retreat through a narrow pass , and , placing himself last of the
party , he fought with and slew such of the enemy as attempted to
press hard on them . Three followers of MacDougal , a father and two
sons , called MacAndrosser , all very strong men , when they saw Bruce
thus protecting the retreat of his followers , rushed on the King at
once . Bruce was on horseback , in the strait pass betwixt a
precipitous rock and a deep lake . He struck the first man a blow
with his sword , as cut off his hand and freed the bridle . The man
bled to death . The other brother had meantime grasped Bruce by the
leg , and was attempting to throw him from horseback . The King , 
setting spurs to his horse , made the animal suddenly spring forward , 
so that the Highlander fell under the horse ' s feet , and , as he was
endeavouring to rise again , Bruce cleft his head in two with his
sword . The father , seeing his two sons thus slain , flew desperately
at the King , and grasped him by the mantle so close to his body , 
that he could not have room to wield his long sword . But with the
heavy pummel of that weapon the King struck this third assailant so
dreadful a blow , that he dashed out his brains . Still , however , the
Highlander kept his dying grasp on the King ' s mantle; so that , to be
free of the dead body , Bruce was obliged to undo the brooch , or
clasp , by which it was fastened , and leave that , and the mantle
itself , behind him . The brooch , which fell thus into the possession
of MacDougal of Lorn , is still preserved in that ancient family as a
memorial . 

The King met with many such encounters amidst his dangerous and
dismal wanderings; yet , though almost always defeated by the
superior numbers of the English , and of such Scots as sided with
them , he still kept up his own spirits and those of his followers . 
He was a better scholar than was usual in those days , when , except
clergymen , few people learned to read and write . But King Robert
could do both very well; and we are told that he sometimes read
aloud to his companions , to amuse them , when they were crossing the
great Highland lakes , in such wretched leaky boats as they could
find for that purpose . Loch Lomond , in particular , is said to have
been the scene of such a lecture . You may see by this , how useful it
is to possess knowledge . 

At last dangers increased so much around the brave King Robert , that
he was obliged to separate himself from his Queen and her ladies . So
Bruce left his Queen , with the Countess of Buchan and others , in the
only castle which remained to him , which was called Kildrummie , and
is situated near the head of the river Don in Aberdeenshire . The
King also left his brother , Nigel Bruce , to defend the castle
against the English; and he himself , with his second brother Edward , 
who was a very brave man , went over to an island called Rachrin , on
the coast of Ireland , where Bruce and the few men who followed his
fortunes passed the winter of 1306 . In the meantime the castle of
Kildrummie was taken by the English , and Nigel Bruce , a beautiful
and brave youth , was cruelly put to death by the victors . The ladies
who had attended on Robert ' s Queen , as well as the Queen herself , 
and the Countess of Buchan , were thrown into strict confinement . 

The Countess of Buchan had given Edward great offence by being
the person who placed the crown on the head of Robert Bruce . She was
imprisoned within the Castle of Berwick , in a cage . The cage was a
strong wooden and iron piece of frame-work , placed within an
apartment , and resembling one of those places in which wild-beasts
are confined . There were such cages in most old prisons to which
captives were consigned , who were to be confined with peculiar
rigour . 

The news of the taking of Kildrummie , the captivity of his wife , and
the execution of his brother , reached Bruce while he was residing in
a miserable dwelling at Rachrin , and reduced him to the point of
despair . After receiving the intelligence from Scotland , Bruce was
lying one morning on his wretched bed , and deliberating with himself
whether he had not better resign all thoughts of again attempting to
make good his right to the Scottish crown , and , dismissing his
followers , transport himself and his brothers to the Holy Land , and
spend the rest of his life in fighting against the Saracens . But
then , on the other hand , he thought it would be both criminal and
cowardly to give up his attempts to restore freedom to Scotland
while there yet remained the least chance of his being successful in
an undertaking , which , rightly considered , was much more his duty
than to drive the infidels out of Palestine . 

While he was divided betwixt these reflections , and doubtful of what
he should do , Bruce was looking upward to the roof of the cabin in
which he lay; and his eye was attracted by a spider , which , hanging
at the end of a long thread of its own spinning , was endeavouring to
swing itself from one beam in the roof to another , for the purpose
of fixing the line on which it meant to stretch its web . The insect
made the attempt again and again without success; at length Bruce
counted that it had tried to carry its point six times , and been as
often unable to do so . It came into his head that he had himself
fought just six battles against the English and their allies , and
that the poor persevering spider was exactly in the same situation
with himself , having made as many trials and been as often
disappointed in what it aimed at .  " Now , " thought Bruce ,  " as I have
no means of knowing what is best to be done , I will be guided by the
luck which shall attend this spider . If the insect shall make
another effort to fix its thread , and shall be successful , I will
venture a seventh time to try my fortune in Scotland; but if the
spider shall fail , I will go to the wars in Palestine , and never
return to my native country more . " 

While Bruce was forming this resolution the spider made another
exertion with all the force it could muster , and fairly succeeded in
fastening its thread to the beam which it had so often in vain
attempted to reach . Bruce seeing the success of the spider , resolved
to try his own fortune; and as he had never before gained a victory , 
so he never afterward sustained any considerable or decisive check
or defeat . I have often met with people of the name of Bruce , so
completely persuaded of the truth of this story , that they would not
on any account kill a spider , because it was that insect which had
shown the example of perseverance , and given a signal of good luck
to their great namesake . Having determined to renew his efforts to
obtain possession of Scotland , the Bruce removed himself and his
followers from Rachrin to the island of Arran , which lies in the
mouth of the Clyde . The King landed , and inquired of the first woman
he met what armed men were in the island . She returned for answer
that there had arrived there very lately a body of armed strangers , 
who had defeated an English governor of the castle , and were now
amusing themselves with hunting about the island . The King , having
caused himself to be guided to the woods which these strangers most
frequented , there blew his horn repeatedly . Now , the chief of the
strangers who had taken the castle was James Douglas , one of the
best of Bruce ' s friends , and he was accompanied by some of the
bravest of that patriotic band . When he heard Robert Bruce ' s horn , 
he knew the sound well , and cried out , that yonder was the King , he
knew by his manner of blowing . So he and his companions hastened to
meet King Robert . They could not help weeping when they considered
their own forlorn condition , but they were stout-hearted men , and
yet looked forward to freeing their country . 

The Bruce was now where the people were most likely to be attached
to him . He continued to keep himself concealed in his own earldom of
Carrick , and in the neighboring country of Galloway , until he should
have matters ready for a general attack upon the English . He was
obliged , in the meantime , to keep very few men with him , both for
the sake of secrecy , and from the difficulty of finding provisions . 

Now , many of the people of Galloway were unfriendly to Bruce . They
lived under the government of one MacDougal , related to the Lord of
Lorn , who had defeated Bruce . These Galloway men had heard that
Bruce was in their country , having no more than sixty men with him;
so they resolved to attack him by surprise , and for this purpose
they got together and brought with them two or three bloodhounds . At
that time bloodhounds , or sleuthhounds , were used for the purpose of
pursuing great criminals . The men of Galloway thought that if they
missed taking Bruce , or killing him at the first onset , and if he
should escape into the woods , they would find him out by means of
these bloodhounds . 

The good King Robert Bruce , who was always watchful and vigilant , 
received some information of the intention of the party to come upon
him suddenly and by night . Accordingly , he quartered his little
troop of sixty men on the side of a deep and swift-running river , 
that had very steep and rocky banks . There was but one ford by which
this river could be crossed in that neighbourhood , and that ford was
deep and narrow , so that two men could scarcely get through abreast;
the ground on which they were to land , on the side where the King
was , was steep , and the path which led upward from the water ' s edge
to the top of the bank , extremely narrow and difficult . 

Bruce caused his men to lie down to take some sleep , at a place
about half a mile distant from the river , while he himself , with two
attendants , went down to watch the ford . He stood looking at the
ford , and thinking how easily the enemy might be kept from passing
there , provided it was bravely defended , when he heard , always
coming nearer and nearer , the baying of a hound . This was the
bloodhound which was tracing the King ' s steps to the ford where he
had crossed , and two hundred Galloway men were along with the
animal , and guided by it . Bruce at first thought of going back to
awaken his men; but then he reflected that it might be only some
shepherd ' s dog .  " My men , " said he ,  " are sorely tired; I will not
disturb their sleep for the yelping of a cur , till I know something
more of the matter . " So he stood and listened; and by and by , as the
cry of the hound came nearer , he began to hear a trampling of
horses , and the voices of men , and the ringing and clattering of
armour , and then he was sure the enemy were coming to the river
side . Then the King thought ,  " If I go back to give my men the alarm , 
these Galloway men will get through the ford without opposition; and
that would be a pity , since it is a place so advantageous to make
defence against them . " So he looked again at the steep path , and the
deep river , and he thought that they gave him so much advantage , 
that he himself could defend the passage with his own hand , until
his men came to assist him . He therefore sent his followers to waken
his men , and remained alone by the river . 

The noise and trampling of the horses increased , and the moon being
bright , Bruce beheld the glancing arms of two hundred men , on the
opposite bank . The men of Galloway , on their part , saw but one
solitary figure guarding the ford , and the foremost of them plunged
into the river without minding him . But as they could only pass the
ford one by one , the Bruce , who stood high above them on the bank
where they were to land , killed the foremost man with a thrust of
his long spear , and with a second thrust stabbed the horse , which
fell down , kicking and plunging in his agonies , on the narrow path , 
and so prevented the others who were following from getting out of
the river . Bruce had thus an opportunity of dealing his blows among
them , while they could not strike at him . In the confusion , five or
six of the enemy were slain , or , having been borne down with the
current , were drowned . The rest were terrified , and drew back . 

But when the Galloway men looked again , and saw they were opposed by
only one man , they themselves being so many , they cried out , that
their honour would be lost forever if they did not force their way;
and encouraged each other , with loud cries , to plunge through and
assault him . But by this time the King ' s soldiers came up to his
assistance , and the Galloway men gave up their enterprise . 

About the time when the Bruce was yet at the head of but few men , 
Sir Aymer de Valence , who was Earl of Pembroke , together with Sir
John of Lorn , came into Galloway , each of them being at the head of
a large body of men . John of Lorn had a bloodhound with him , which
it was said had formerly belonged to Robert Bruce himself; and
having been fed by the King with his own hands , it became attached
to him , and would follow his footsteps anywhere , as dogs are well
known to trace their master ' s steps , whether they be bloodhounds or
not . By means of this hound , John of Lorn thought he should
certainly find out Bruce , and take revenge on him for the death of
his relation Comyn . 

The King saw that he was followed by a large body , and being
determined to escape from them , he made all the people who were with
him disperse themselves different ways , thinking thus that the enemy
must needs lose trace of him . He kept only one man along with him , 
and that was his own foster-brother , or the son of his nurse . When
John of Lorn came to the place where Bruce ' s companions had
dispersed themselves , the bloodhound , after it had sniffed up and
down for a little , quitted the footsteps of all the other fugitives , 
and ran barking upon the track of two men out of the whole number . 
Then John of Lorn knew that one of these two must needs be King
Robert . Accordingly , he commanded five of his men that were speedy
of foot to chase after him , and either make him prisoner or slay
him . The Highlanders started off accordingly , and ran so fast , that
they gained sight of Robert and his foster-brother . The King asked
his companion what help he could give him , and his foster-brother
answered he was ready to do his best . So these two turned on the
five men of John of Lorn , and killed them all . 

But by this time Bruce very much fatigued , and yet they dared not
sit down to take any rest; for whenever they stopped for an instant , 
they heard the cry of the bloodhound behind them , and knew by that , 
that their enemies were coming up fast after them . At length , they
came to a wood , through which ran a small river . Then Bruce said to
his foster-brother ,  " Let us wade down this stream for a great way , 
instead of going straight across , and so this unhappy hound will
lose the scent; for if we were once clear of him , I should not be
afraid of getting away from the pursuers . " Accordingly , the King and
his attendant walked a great way down the stream , taking care to
keep their feet in the water , which could not retain any scent where
they had stepped . Then they came ashore on the further side from the
enemy , and went deep into the wood before they stopped to rest
themselves . In the meanwhile , the hound led John of Lorn straight to
the place where the King went into the water , but there the dog
began to be puzzled , not knowing where to go next . So , John of Lorn , 
seeing the dog had lost track , gave up the chase , and returned to
join with Aymer de Valence . 

But King Robert ' s adventures were not yet ended . It was now near
night , and he went boldy into a farmhouse , where he found the
mistress , an old , true-hearted Scotswoman , sitting alone . Upon
seeing a stranger enter she asked him who and what he was . The King
answered that he was a traveller , who was journeying through the
country . 

 " All travellers , " answered the good woman ,  " are welcome here , for
the sake of one . " 

 " And who is that one , " said the King ,  " for whose sake you make all
welcome ? " 

 " It is our rightful King , Robert the Bruce , " answered the mistress , 
 " and although he is now pursued and hunted after with hounds and
horns , I hope to live to see him King over all Scotland . " 

 " Since you love him so well , madame , " said the King ,  " know that you
see him before you . I am Robert the Bruce . " 

 " You ! " said the good woman , in great surprise;  " and wherefore are
you thus alone ? where are all your men ? " 

 " I have none with me at this moment , " answered Bruce ,  " and therefore
I must travel alone . " 

 " But that shall not be , " said the brave old dame ,  " for I have two
stout sons , gallant and trusty men , who shall be your servants for
life and death . " 

So she brought her two sons , and though she well knew the dangers to
which she exposed them , she made them swear fidelity to the King . 

Now , the loyal woman was getting everything ready for the King ' s
supper , when suddenly there was a great trampling of horses heard
round the house . They thought it must be some of the English , or
John of Lorn ' s men , and the good wife called upon her sons to fight
to the last for King Robert . But shortly after , they heard the voice
of the good Lord James of Douglas , and of Edward Bruce , the King ' s
brother , who had come with a hundred and fifty horsemen , according
to the instructions that the King had left with them at parting . 

Robert the Bruce was right joyful to meet his brother , and his
faithful friend Lord James; and had no sooner found himself once
more at the head of such a considerable body of followers , than he
forgot hunger and weariness . There was nothing but mount and ride;
and as the Scots rushed suddenly into the village where the English
were quartered , they easily dispersed and cut them to pieces . 

The consequence of these successes of King Robert was that soldiers
came to join him on all sides , and that he obtained several
victories over English commanders; until at length the English were
afraid to venture into the open country , as formerly , unless when
they could assemble themselves in considerable bodies . They thought
it safer to lie still in the towns and castles which they had
garrisoned . 

Edward I would have entered Scotland at the head of a large army , 
before he had left Bruce time to conquer back the country . But very
fortunately for the Scots , that wise and skilful , though ambitious
King , died when he was on the point of marching into Scotland . His
son Edward II neglected the Scottish war , and thus lost the
opportunity of defeating Bruce , when his force was small . But when
Sir Philip Mowbray , the governor of Stirling , came to London , to
tell the King , that Stirling , the last Scottish town of importance
which remained in possession of the English , was to be surrendered
if it were not relieved by force of arms before midsummer , then all
the English nobles called out , it would be a sin and shame to permit
the fair conquest which Edward I had made , to be forfeited to the
Scots for want of fighting . 

King Edward II , therefore , assembled one of the greatest armies
which a King of England ever commanded . There were troops brought
from all his dominions , many brave soldiers from the French
provinces , many Irish , many Welsh , and all the great English nobles
and barons , with their followers . The number was not less than one
hundred thousand men . 

King Robert the Brace summoned all his nobles and barons to join
him , when he heard of the great preparations which the King of
England was making . They were not so numerous as the English by many
thousand men . In fact , his whole army did not very much exceed
thirty thousand , and they were much worse armed than the wealthy
Englishmen; but then , Robert was one of the most expert generals of
the time; and the officers he had under him , were his brother
Edward , his faithful follower the Douglas , and other brave and
experienced leaders . His men had been accustomed to fight and gain
victories under every disadvantage of situation and numbers . 

The King , on his part , studied how he might supply , by address and
stratagem , what he wanted in numbers and strength . He knew the
superiority of the English in their heavy-armed cavalry , and in
their archers . Both these advantages he resolved to provide against . 
With this purpose , he led his army down into a plain near Stirling . 
The English army must needs pass through a boggy country , broken
with water-courses , while the Scots occupied hard dry ground . He
then caused all the ground upon the front of his line of battle , to
be dug full of holes , about as deep as a man ' s knee . They were
filled with light brushwood , and the turf was laid on the top , so
that it appeared a plain field , while in reality it was as full of
these pits as a honeycomb is of holes . He also , it is said , caused
steel spikes , called calthrops , to be scattered up and down in the
plain , where the English cavalry were most likely to advance , 
trusting in that manner to lame and destroy their horses . 

When the Scottish army was drawn up , the line stretched north and
south . On the south , it was terminated by the banks of the brook
called Bannockburn , which are so rocky , that no troops could attack
them there . On the left , the Scottish line extended near to the town
of Stirling . Bruce reviewed his troops very carefully . He then spoke
to the soldiers , and expressed his determination to gain the
victory , or to lose his life on the field of battle . He desired that
all those who did not propose to fight to the last , should leave the
field before the battle began , and that none should remain except
those who were determined to take the issue of victory or death , as
God should send it . When the main body of his army was thus placed
in order , the King dispatched James of Douglas , and Sir Robert
Keith , the Mareschal of the Scottish army , in order that they might
survey the English force . They returned with information , that the
approach of that vast host was one of the most beautiful and
terrible sights which could be seen--that the whole country seemed
covered with men-at-arms on horse and foot . 

It was upon the twenty-third of June , 1314 , the King of Scotland
heard the news , that the English army was approaching Stirling . The
van now came in sight , and a number of their bravest knights drew
near to see what the Scots were doing . They saw King Robert dressed
in his armour , and distinguished by a gold crown , which he wore over
his helmet . He was not mounted on his great war-horse , because he
did not expect to fight that evening . But he rode on a little pony
up and down the ranks of his army , putting his men in order , and
carried in his hand a sort of battle-axe made of steel . When the
King saw the English horsemen draw near , he advanced a little before
his own men , that he might look at them more nearly . 

There was a knight among the English , called Sir Henry de Bohun , who
thought this would be a good opportunity to gain great fame to
himself , and put an end to the war , by killing King Robert . The King
being poorly mounted , and having no lance , Bohun galloped on him
suddenly and furiously , thinking , with his long spear , and his tall , 
powerful horse , easily to bear him down to the ground . King Robert
saw him , and permitted him to come very near , then suddenly turned
his pony a little to one side , so that Sir Henry missed him with the
lance-point , and was in the act of being carried past him by the
career of his horse . But as he passed , King Robert rose up in his
stirrups , and struck Sir Henry on the head with his battle-axe so
terrible a blow , that it broke to pieces his iron helmet as if it
had been a nut-shell , and hurled him from his saddle . He was dead
before he reached the ground . This gallant action was blamed by the
Scottish leaders , who thought Bruce ought not to have exposed
himself to so much danger , when the safety of the whole army
depended on him . The King only kept looking at his weapon , which was
injured by the force of the blow , and said ,  " I have broken my good
battle-axe . " 

The next morning the English King ordered his men to begin the
battle . The archers then bent their bows , and began to shoot so
closely together , that the arrows fell like flakes of snow on a
Christmas day . They killed many of the Scots , and might have decided
the victory; but Bruce was prepared for them . A body of men-at-arms , 
well mounted , rode at full gallop among them , and as the archers had
no weapons save their bows and arrows , which they could not use when
they were attacked hand to hand , they were cut down in great numbers
by the Scottish horsemen , and thrown into total confusion . The fine
English cavalry then advanced to support their archers . But coming
over the ground which was dug full of pits the horses fell into
these holes and the riders lay tumbling about , without any means of
defence , and unable to rise , from the weight of their armour . 

While the battle was obstinately maintained on both sides , an event
happened which decided the victory . The servants and attendants on
the Scottish camp had been sent behind the army to a place afterward
called the Gillies ' hill . But when they saw that their masters were
likely to gain the day , they rushed from their place of concealment
with such weapons as they could get , that they might have their
share in the victory and in the spoil . The English , seeing them come
suddenly over the hill , mistook this disorderly rabble for a new
army coming up to sustain the Scots , and , losing all heart , began to
shift every man for himself . Edward himself left the field as fast
as he could ride . 

The English , after this great defeat , were no longer in a condition
to support their pretensions to be masters of Scotland , or to
continue to send armies into that country to overcome it . On the
contrary , they became for a time scarce able to defend their own
frontiers against King Robert and his soldiers . 

Thus did Robert Bruce arise from the condition of an exile , hunted
with bloodhounds like a stag or beast of prey , to the rank of an
independent sovereign , universally acknowledged to be one of the
wisest and bravest Kings who then lived . The nation of Scotland was
also raised once more from the situation of a distressed and
conquered province to that of a free and independent state , governed
by its own laws . 

Robert Bruce continued to reign gloriously for several years , and
the Scots seemed , during his government , to have acquired a complete
superiority over their neighbours . But then we must remember , that
Edward II who then reigned in England , was a foolish prince , and
listened to bad counsels; so that it is no wonder that he was beaten
by so wise and experienced a general as Robert Bruce , who had fought
his way to the crown through so many disasters , and acquired in
consequence so much renown . 

In the last year of Robert the Bruce ' s reign , he became extremely
sickly and infirm , chiefly owing to a disorder called the leprosy , 
which he had caught during the hardships and misfortunes of his
youth , when he was so frequently obliged to hide himself in woods
and morasses , without a roof to shelter him . He lived at a castle
called Cardross , on the beautiful banks of the river Clyde , near to
where it joins the sea; and his chief amusement was to go upon the
river , and down to the sea in a ship , which he kept for his
pleasure . He was no longer able to sit upon his war-horse , or to
lead his army to the field . 

While Bruce was in this feeble state , Edward II , King of England , 
died , and was succeeded by his son Edward III . He turned out
afterward to be one of the wisest and bravest Kings whom England
ever had; but when he first mounted the throne he was very young . 
The war between the English and the Scots still lasted at the time . 

But finally a peace was concluded with Robert Bruce , on terms highly
honourable to Scotland; for the English King renounced all
pretensions to the sovereignty of the country . 

Good King Robert did not long survive this joyful event . He was not
aged more than four-and-fifty years , but his bad health was caused
by the hardships which he sustained during his youth , and at length
he became very ill . Finding that he could not recover , he assembled
around his bedside the nobles and counsellors in whom he most
trusted . He told them , that now , being on his death-bed , he sorely
repented all his misdeeds , and particularly , that he had , in his
passion , killed Comyn with his own hand , in the church and before
the altar . He said that if he had lived , he had intended to go to
Jerusalem to make war upon the Saracens who held the Holy Land , as
some expiation for the evil deeds he had done . But since he was
about to die , he requested of his dearest friend and bravest
warrior , and that was the good Lord James Douglas , that he should
carry his heart to the Holy Land . Douglas wept bitterly as he
accepted this office--the last mark of the Brace ' s confidence and
friendship . 

The King soon afterward expired; and his heart was taken out from
his body and embalmed , that is , prepared with spices and perfumes , 
that it might remain a long time fresh and uncorrupted . Then the
Douglas caused a case of silver to be made , into which he put the
Bruce ' s heart , and wore it around his neck , by a string of silk and
gold . And he set forward for the Holy Land , with a gallant train of
the bravest men in Scotland , who , to show their value of and sorrow
for their brave King Robert Bruce , resolved to attend his heart to
the city of Jerusalem . In going to Palestine Douglas landed in
Spain , where the Saracen King , or Sultan of Granada , called Osmyn , 
was invading the realms of Alphonso , the Spanish King of Castile . 
King Alphonso received Douglas with great honour and distinction , 
and easily persuaded the Scottish Earl that he would do good service
to the Christian cause , by assisting him to drive back the Saracens
of Granada before proceeding on his voyage to Jerusalem . Lord
Douglas and his followers went accordingly to a great battle against
Osmyn , and had little difficulty in defeating the Saracens . But
being ignorant of the mode of fighting among the cavalry of the
East , the Scots pursued the chase too far , and the Moors , when they
saw them scattered and separated from each other , turned suddenly
back , with a loud cry of ALLAH ILLAH ALLAH , which is their shout of
battle , and surrounded such of the Scottish knights and squires as
were dispersed from each other . 

In this new skirmish , Douglas saw Sir William St . Clair of Roslyn
fighting desperately , surrounded by many Moors , who were having at
him with their sabres .  " Yonder worthy knight will be slain , " Douglas
said ,  " unless he have instant help . " With that he galloped to his
rescue , but presently was himself also surrounded by many Moors . 
When he found the enemy press so thick round him , as to leave him no
chance of escaping , the Earl took from his neck the Bruce ' s heart , 
and speaking to it , as he would have done to the King , had he been
alive-- " Pass first in fight , " he said ,  " as thou wert wont to do , and
Douglas will follow thee , or die . " 

He then threw the King ' s heart among the enemy , and rushing forward
to the place where it fell , was there slain . His body was found
lying above the silver case , as if it had been his last object to
defend the Bruce ' s heart . 

Such of the Scottish knights as remained alive returned to their own
country . They brought back the heart of the Bruce , and the bones of
the good Lord James . The Bruce ' s heart was buried below the high
altar in Melrose Abbey . As for his body , it was laid in the
sepulchre in the midst of the church of Dunfermline , under a marble
stone . The church afterward becoming ruinous , and the roof falling
down with age , the monument was broken to pieces , and nobody could
tell where it stood . But when they were repairing the church at
Dunfermline , and removing the rubbish , lo ! they found fragments of
the marble tomb of Robert Bruce . Then they began to dig farther , 
thinking to discover the body of this celebrated monarch; and at
length they came to the skeleton of a tall man , and they knew it
must be that of King Robert , both as he was known to have been
buried in a winding sheet of cloth of gold , of which many fragments
were found about this skeleton , and also because the breastbone
appeared to have been sawed through , in order to take the heart . A
new tomb was prepared into which the bones were laid with profound
respect . 


