I . THE CHIEF OF THE MAC-IVORS AND THE CHIEF'S SISTER

WHEN Edward awoke next morning , he could not for a moment remember where
he was . The cave was deserted . Only the grey ashes of the fire , a few
gnawed bones , and an empty keg remained to prove that he was still on
the scene of last night's feast . He went out into the sunlight . In a
little natural harbour the boat was lying snugly moored . Farther out , on
a rocky spit , was the mark of last night's beacon-fire . Here Waverley
had to turn back . Cliffs shut him in on every side , and Edward was at a
loss what to do , till he discovered , climbing perilously out in the rock
above the cave mouth , some slight steps or ledges . These he mounted with
difficulty , and , passing over the shoulder of the cliff , found himself
presently on the shores of a loch about four miles long , surrounded on
every side by wild heathery mountains . 

In the distance he could see a man fishing and a companion watching him . 
By the Lochaber axe which the latter carried Edward recognised the
fisher as Evan Dhu . On a stretch of sand under a birch tree , a girl was
laying out a breakfast of milk , eggs , barley bread , fresh butter , and
honeycomb . She was singing blithely , yet she must have had to travel far
that morning to collect such dainties in so desolate a region . 

This proved to be Alice , the daughter of Donald Bean Lean , and it is
nothing to her discredit that she had made herself as pretty as she
could , that she might attend upon the handsome young Englishman . All
communication , however , had to be by smiles and signs , for Alice spoke
no English . Nevertheless she set out her dainties with right good-will , 
and then seated herself on a stone a little distance away to watch for
an opportunity of serving the young soldier . 

Presently Evan Dhu came up with his catch , a fine salmon-trout , and soon
slices of the fish were broiling on the wood embers . After breakfast , 
Alice gathered what was left into a wicker basket , and , flinging her
plaid about her , presented her cheek to Edward for "the stranger's
kiss . " Evan Dhu made haste to secure a similar privilege , but Alice
sprang lightly up the bank out of his reach , and with an arch wave of
her hand to Edward she disappeared . 

Then Evan Dhu led Edward back to the boat . The three men embarked , and
after emerging from the mouth of the cavern , a clumsy sail was hoisted , 
and they bore away up the lake--Evan Dhu all the time loud in the
praises of Alice Bean Lean . 

Edward said that it was a pity that such a maiden should be the daughter
of a common thief . But this Evan hotly denied . According to Evan , Donald
Bean Lean , though indeed no reputable character , was far from being a
thief . A thief was one who stole a cow from a poor cotter , but he who
lifted a drove from a Sassenach laird was "a gentleman drover . "

"But he would be hanged , all the same , if he were caught ! " objected
Edward . "I do not see the difference . "

"To be sure , he would _die for the law_ , as many a pretty man has done
before him , " cried Evan . "And a better death than to die , lying on damp
straw in yonder cave like a mangy tyke ! "

"And what , " Edward suggested , "would become of pretty Alice then ? "

"Alice is both canny and fendy , " said the bold Evan Dhu , with a cock of
his bonnet , "and I ken nocht to hinder me to marry her mysel' ! "

Edward laughed and applauded the Highlander's spirit , but asked also as
to the fate of the Baron of Bradwardine's cattle . 

"By this time , " said Evan , "I warrant they are safe in the pass of
Bally-Brough and on their road back to Tully-Veolan . And that is more
than a regiment of King George's red soldiers could have brought about ! "

Evan Dhu had indeed some reason to be proud . 

Reassured as to this , Edward accompanied his guide with more confidence
toward the castle of Vich Ian Vohr . The "five miles Scots" seemed to
stretch themselves out indefinitely , but at last the figure of a hunter , 
equipped with gun , dogs , and a single attendant , was seen far across the
heath . 

"_Shogh_ , " said the man with the Lochaber axe , "tat's the Chief ! "

Evan Dhu , who had boasted of his master's great retinue , denied it
fiercely . 

"The Chief , " he said , "would not come out with never a soul with him but
Callum Beg , to meet with an English gentleman . "

But in spite of this prophecy , the Chief of Clan Ivor it was . Fergus
Mac-Ivor , whom his people called Vich Ian Vohr , was a young man of much
grace and dignity , educated in France , and of a strong , secret , and
turbulent character , which by policy he hid for the most part under an
appearance of courtesy and kindness . He had long been mustering his clan
in secret , in order once more to take a leading part in another attempt
to dethrone King George , and to set on the throne of Britain either the
Chevalier St . George or his son Prince Charles . 

When Waverley and the Chief approached the castle--a stern and rugged
pile , surrounded by walls , they found a large body of armed Highlanders
drawn up before the gate . 

"These , " said Vich Ian Vohr , carelessly , "are a part of the clan whom I
ordered out , to see that they were in a fit state to defend the country
in such troublous times . Would Captain Waverley care to see them go
through part of their exercise ? "

Thereupon the men , after showing their dexterity at drill , and their
fine target-shooting , divided into two parties , and went through the
incidents of a battle--the charge , the combat , the flight , and the
headlong pursuit--all to the sound of the great warpipes . 

Edward asked why , with so large a force , the Chief did not at once put
down such robber bands as that of Donald Bean Lean . 

"Because , " said the Chief , bitterly , "if I did , I should at once be
summoned to Stirling Castle to deliver up the few broadswords the
government has left us . I should gain little by that . But there is
dinner , " he added , as if anxious to change the subject , "let me show you
the inside of my rude mansion . "

The long and crowded dinner-table to which Edward sat down , told of the
Chief's immense hospitality . After the meal , healths were drunk , and the
bard of the clan recited a wild and thrilling poem in Gaelic--of which , 
of course , Edward could not understand so much as one word , though it
excited the clansmen so that they sprang up in ecstasy , many of them
waving their arms about in sympathy with the warlike verses . The Chief , 
exactly in the ancient manner , presented a silver cup full of wine to
the minstrel . He was to drink the one and keep the other for himself . 

After a few more toasts , Vich Ian Vohr offered to take Waverley up to be
presented to his sister . They found Flora Mac-Ivor in her parlour , a
plain and bare chamber with a wide prospect from the windows . She had
her brother's dark curling hair , dark eyes , and lofty expression , but
her expression seemed sweeter , though not , perhaps , softer . She was , 
however , even more fiercely Jacobite than her brother , and her devotion
to "the King over the Water" ( as they called King James ) was far more
unselfish than that of Vich Ian Vohr . Flora Mac-Ivor had been educated
in a French convent , yet now she gave herself heart and soul to the good
of her wild Highland clan and to the service of him whom she looked on
as the true King . 

She was gracious to Edward , and at the request of Fergus , told him the
meaning of the war-song he had been listening to in the hall . She was , 
her brother said , famed for her translations from Gaelic into English , 
but for the present she could not be persuaded to recite any of these to
Edward . 

He had better fortune , however , when , finding Flora Mac-Ivor in a wild
spot by a waterfall , she sang him , to the accompaniment of a harp , a
song of great chiefs and their deeds which fired the soul of the young
man . He could not help admiring--he almost began to love her from that
moment . 

After this reception , Edward continued very willingly at
Glennaquoich--both because of his growing admiration for Flora , and
because his curiosity increased every day as to this wild race , and the
life so different from all that he had hitherto known . Nothing occurred
for three weeks to disturb his pleasant dreams , save the chance
discovery , made when he was writing a letter to the Baron , that he had
somehow lost his seal with the arms of Waverley , which he wore attached
to his watch . Flora was inclined to blame Donald Bean Lean for the
theft , but the Chief scouted the idea . It was impossible , he said , when
Edward was his guest , and , besides ( he added slyly ) , Donald would never
have taken the seal and left the watch . Whereupon Edward borrowed Vich
Ian Vohr's seal , and , having despatched his letter , thought no more of
the matter . 

Soon afterwards , whilst Waverley still remained at Glennaquoich , there
was a great hunting of the stag , to which Fergus went with three hundred
of his clan to meet some of the greatest Highland chiefs , his
neighbours . He took Edward with him , and the numbers present amounted
almost to those of a formidable army . While the clansmen drove in the
deer , the chiefs sat on the heather in little groups and talked in low
tones . During the _drive_ , the main body of the deer , in their
desperation , charged right upon the place where the chief sportsmen
were waiting in ambush . The word was given for every one to fling
himself down on his face . Edward , not understanding the language , 
remained erect , and his life was only saved by the quickness of Vich Ian
Vohr , who seized him and flung him down , holding him there by main force
till the whole herd had rushed over them . When Edward tried to rise , he
found that he had severely sprained his ankle . 

However , among those present at the _drive_ , there was found an old man , 
half-surgeon , half-conjurer , who applied hot fomentations , muttering all
the time of the operation such gibberish as _Gaspar-Melchior-Balthazar-max-prax-fax ! _

Thus it happened that , to his great disappointment , Edward was unable to
accompany the clansmen and their chiefs any farther . So Vich Ian Vohr
had Edward placed in a litter , woven of birch and hazel , and walked
beside this rude couch to the house of an old man , a smaller chieftain , 
who , with only a few old vassals , lived a retired life at a place called
Tomanrait . 

Here he left Edward to recruit , promising to come back in a few days , in
the hope that by that time Edward would be able to ride a Highland pony
in order to return to Glennaquoich . 

On the sixth morning Fergus returned , and Edward gladly mounted to
accompany him . As they approached the castle , he saw , with pleasure , 
Flora coming to meet them . 


II . MISFORTUNES NEVER COME SINGLE

The Chief's beautiful sister appeared very glad to see Edward , and , as
her brother spoke a few hasty words to her in Gaelic , she suddenly
clasped her hands , and , looking up to heaven , appeared to ask a blessing
upon some enterprise . She then gave Edward some letters that had arrived
for him during his absence . It was perhaps as well that Edward took
these to his room to open , considering the amount of varied ill news
that he found in them . 

The first was from his father , who had just been dismissed from his
position as King's minister , owing ( as he put it ) to the ingratitude of
the great--but really , as was proved afterwards , on account of some
political plots which he had formed against his chief , the prime
minister of the day . 

Then his generous uncle , Sir Everard , wrote that all differences were
over between his brother and himself . He had espoused his quarrel , and
he directed Edward at once to send in the resignation of his commission
to the War Office without any preliminaries , forbidding him longer to
serve a government which had treated his father so badly . 

But the letter which touched Edward most deeply was one from his
commanding officer at Dundee , which declared curtly that if he did not
report himself at the headquarters of the regiment within three days
after the date of writing , he would be obliged to take steps in the
matter which would be exceedingly disagreeable to Captain Waverley . 

Edward at once sat down and wrote to Colonel Gardiner that , as he had
thus chosen to efface the remembrance of past civilities , there was
nothing left to him but to resign his commission , which he did formally , 
and ended his letter by requesting his commanding officer to forward
this resignation to the proper quarter . 

No little perplexed as to the meaning of all this , Edward was on his way
to consult Fergus Mac-Ivor on the subject , when the latter advanced with
an open newspaper in his hand . 

"Do your letters , " he asked , "confirm this unpleasant news ? "

And he held out the _Caledonian Mercury_ , in which not only did he find
his father's disgrace chronicled , but on turning to the _Gazette_ he
found the words , "Edward Waverley , Captain in the --th regiment of
dragoons , superseded for absence without leave . " The name of his
successor , one Captain Butler , followed immediately . 

On looking at the date of Colonel Gardiner's missive as compared with
that of the _Gazette_ , it was evident that his commanding officer had
carried out his threat to the letter . Yet it was not at all like him to
have done so . It was still more out of keeping with the constant
kindness that he had shown to Edward . It was the young man's first idea , 
in accordance with the customs of the time , to send Colonel Gardiner a
challenge . But , upon Fergus Mac-Ivor's advice , Edward ultimately
contented himself with adding a postscript to his first letter , marking
the time at which he had received the first summons , and regretting that
the hastiness of his commander's action had prevented his anticipating
it by sending in his resignation . 

"That , if anything , " said Fergus , "will make this Calvinistic colonel
blush for his injustice . "

But it was not long before some part at least of the mystery was made
plain . Fergus took advantage of Edward's natural anger at his unworthy
treatment , to reveal to him that a great rising was about to take place
in the Highlands in favour of King James , and to urge him to cast in his
lot with the clans . Flora , on the contrary , urged him to be careful and
cautious , lest he should involve others to whom he owed everything , in a
common danger with himself . 

Edward , whose fancy ( if not whose heart ) had gradually been turning more
and more toward the beautiful and patriotic Flora , appeared less
interested in rebellion than in obtaining her brother's good-will and
bespeaking his influence with his sister . 

"Out upon you , " cried Fergus , with pretended ill-humour , "can you think
of nothing but ladies at such a time ? Besides , why come to me in such a
matter ? Flora is up the glen . Go and ask herself . And Cupid go with you ! 
But do not forget that my lovely sister , like her loving brother , is apt
to have a pretty strong will of her own ! "

Edward's heart beat as he went up the rocky hillside to find Flora . She
received and listened to him with kindness , but steadily refused to
grant him the least encouragement . All her thoughts , her hopes , her life
itself , were set on the success of this one bold stroke for a crown . 
Till the rightful King was on his throne , she could not think of
anything else . Love and marriage were not for such as Flora Mac-Ivor . 
Edward , in spite of the manifest good-will of the chief , had to be
content with such cold comfort as he could extract from Flora's promise
that she would remember him in her prayers ! 

Next morning Edward was awakened to the familiar sound of Daft Davie
Gellatley's voice singing below his window . For a moment he thought
himself back at Tully-Veolan . Davie was declaring loudly that

 "_My heart's in the Highland , my heart is not here . _"

Then , immediately changing to a less sentimental strain , he added with a
contemptuous accent:

 "_There's nocht in the Highlands but syboes and leeks , _
 _And lang-leggit callants gaun wanting the breeks;_
 _Wanting the breeks , and without hose or shoon , _
 _But we'll a' win the breeks when King Jamie comes hame . _"

Edward , eager to know what had brought the Bradwardine "innocent" so far
from home , dressed hastily and went down . Davie , without stopping his
dancing for a moment , came whirling past , and , as he went , thrust a
letter into Waverley's hand . It proved to be from Rose Bradwardine , and
among other things it contained the news that the Baron had gone away to
the north with a body of horsemen , while the red soldiers had been at
Tully-Veolan searching for her father and also asking after Edward
himself . Indeed they had carried off his servant prisoner , together with
everything he had left at Tully-Veolan . Rose also warned him against the
danger of returning thither , and at the same time sent her compliments
to Fergus and Flora . The last words in the letter were , "_Is she not as
handsome and accomplished as I described her to be ? _"

Edward was exceedingly perplexed . Knowing his innocence of all treason , 
he could not imagine why he should be accused of it . He consulted
Fergus , who told him he would to a certainty be hanged or imprisoned if
he went south . Nevertheless , Edward persisted in "running his hazard . "
The Chief , though wishful to keep him , did not absolutely say him nay . 
Flora , instead of coming down to bid him good-bye , sent only excuses . So
altogether it was in no happy frame of mind that Edward rode away to the
south upon the Chief's horse , Brown Dermid , and with Callum Beg for an
attendant in the guise of a Lowland groom . 

Callum warned his master against saying anything when they got to the
first little Lowland town , either on the subject of the Highlands , or
about his master , Vich Ian Vohr . 

"The people there are bitter Whigs , teil burst them ! " he said fiercely . 
As they rode on they saw many people about the street , chiefly old women
in tartan hoods and red cloaks , who seemed to cast up their hands in
horror at the sight of Waverley's horse . Edward asked the reason . 

"Oh , " said Callum Beg , "it's either the muckle Sunday hersel' , or the
little government Sunday that they caa the Fast ! "

It proved to be the latter , and the innkeeper , a severe sly-looking man , 
received them with scanty welcome . Indeed , he only admitted them because
he remembered that it was in his power to fine them for the crime of
travelling on a Fast Day by an addition to the length of his reckoning
next morning . 

But as soon as Edward announced his wish for a horse and guide to Perth , 
the hypocritical landlord made ready to go with him in person . Callum
Beg , excited by the golden guinea which Waverley gave him , offered to
show his gratitude by waiting a little distance along the road , and
"kittlin' the landlord's quarters wi' her skene-occle"--or , in other
words , setting a dagger in his back . Apparently Vich Ian Vohr's page
thought no more of such a deed than an ordinary English boy would have
thought of stealing an apple out of an orchard . 


THE THIRD INTERLUDE--BEING MAINLY A FEW WORDS UPON HEROES

 Among the listeners there was somewhat less
 inclination than before to act this part of the
 story . For one thing , the boys were righteously
 indignant at the idea of any true hero being in
 love--unless , indeed , he could carry off his bride
 from the deck of a pirate vessel , cutlass in hand , 
 and noble words of daring on his lips . 

 As for the girls , well--they knew that the bushes
 were dripping wet , and that if they set their feet
 upon their native heath , they would certainly be
 made to change their stockings as soon as they went
 home . This was a severe discourager of romance . 
 There was nothing to prevent any one of them from
 asking questions , however . _That_ was a business in
 which they excelled . 

 "But why did the Highland people want to rebel , 
 anyway ? " demanded Hugh John . "If I could have
 hunted like that , and raided , and carried off
 cattle , and had a castle with pipes playing and
 hundreds of clansmen to drill , I shouldn't have
 been such a soft as to rebel and get them all taken
 away from me ! "

 "It was because they were loyal to their rightful
 King , " said Sweetheart , who is a Cavalier and a
 Jacobite--in the intervals of admiring Cromwell , 
 and crying because they shot down the poor
 Covenanters . 

 "_I_ think , " said Sir Toady , who had been sitting
 very thoughtful , "that they just liked to fight , 
 and King George would not let them . So they wanted
 a king who would not mind . Same as us , you know . If
 we are caught fighting in school , we get whipped , 
 but father lets us fight outside as much as we want
 to . Besides , what did old Vich Ian Vohr want with
 all these silly Highlanders , eating up everything
 in his castle , if there were never any battles that
 they could fight for him ? "

 This was certainly a very strong and practical
 view , and so much impressed the others that they
 sat a long while quiet , turning it over in their
 minds . 

 "Well , at any rate , " said Sweetheart , dropping her
 head with a sigh to go on with her seam , "I know
 that Flora Mac-Ivor was truly patriotic . See how
 she refused to listen to Waverley , all because she
 wanted to give her life for the cause . "

 "Humph , " said Hugh John , disrespectfully turning up
 his nose , "that's all girls think about--loving , 
 an' marrying , an' playing on harps--"

 "I don't play on harps , " sighed Sweetheart , "but I
 do wish I had a banjo ! "

 "I wish I had a targe and a broadsword , and the
 Chief's horse , Brown Dermid , to ride on , " said Hugh
 John , putting on his "biggety" look . 

 "And a nice figure you would cut , " sneered Sir
 Toady Lion , provokingly; "Highlanders don't fight
 on horseback ! You ought to know that ! "

 Whereupon the first engagement of the campaign was
 immediately fought out on the carpet . And it was
 not till after the intervention of the Superior
 Power had restored quiet that the next tale from
 _Waverley_ could be proceeded with . 

