THE BARON'S SURPRISE

AFTER wandering about for some time Edward came unexpectedly upon a
hamlet . Lights gleamed down the street , and Edward could hear loud
voices and the tramp of horses . The sound of shouted orders and
soldiers' oaths soon told him that he was in great danger . For these
were English troops , and if they caught him in his Mac-Ivor tartan , 
would assuredly give him short shrift and a swift bullet . 

Lingering a moment uncertainly near the gate of a small garden
enclosure , he felt himself caught by gentle hands and drawn toward a
house . 

"Come , Ned , " said a low voice , "the dragoons are down the village , and
they will do thee a mischief . Come with me into feyther's ! "

Judging this to be very much to the purpose , Edward followed , but when
the girl saw the tall figure in tartans instead of the sweetheart she
had expected , she dropped the candle she had lighted , and called out for
her father . 

A stout Westmoreland peasant at once appeared , poker in hand , and
presently Edward found himself not ill received--by the daughter on
account of a likeness to her lover ( so she said ) and by the father
because of a certain weakness for the losing side . So , in the house of
Farmer Jopson , Edward slept soundly that night , in spite of the dangers
which surrounded him on every side . In the morning the true Edward , 
whose name turned out to be Ned Williams , was called in to consult with
father and daughter . It seemed impossible for Edward to go north to
rejoin the Prince's forces . They had evacuated Penrith and marched away
toward Carlisle . The whole intervening country was covered by scouting
parties of government horsemen . Whereupon Ned Williams , who wished above
all things to rid the house of his handsome namesake , lest his
sweetheart Cicely should make other mistakes , offered to get Waverley a
change of clothes , and to conduct him to his father's farm near
Ulswater . Neither old Jopson nor his daughter would accept a farthing of
money for saving Waverley's life . A hearty handshake paid one; a kiss , 
the other . And so it was not long before Ned Williams was introducing
our hero to his family , in the character of a young clergyman who was
detained in the north by the unsettled state of the country . 

On their way into Cumberland they passed the field of battle where
Edward had lost sight of Fergus . Many bodies still lay upon the face of
the moorland , but that of Vich Ian Vohr was not among them , and Edward
passed on with some hope that in spite of the _Bodach Glas_ , Fergus
might have escaped his doom . They found Callum Beg , however , his tough
skull cloven at last by a dragoon's sword , but there was no sign either
of Evan or of his Chieftain . 

In the secure shelter of good Farmer Williams's house among the hills , 
it was Edward's lot to remain somewhat longer than he intended . In the
first place , it was wholly impossible to move for ten days , owing to a
great fall of snow . Then he heard how that the Prince had retreated
farther into Scotland , how Carlisle had been besieged and taken by the
English , and that the whole north was covered by the hosts of the Duke
of Cumberland and General Wade . 

But in the month of January it happened that the clergyman who came to
perform the ceremony at the wedding of Ned Williams and Cicely Jopson , 
brought with him a newspaper which he showed to Edward . In it Waverley
read with astonishment a notice of his father's death in London , and of
the approaching trial of Sir Everard for high treason--unless ( said the
report ) Edward Waverley , son of the late Richard Waverley , and heir to
the baronet , should in the meantime surrender himself to justice . 

It was with an aching anxious heart that Waverley set out by the
northern diligence for London . He found himself in the vehicle opposite
to an officer's wife , one Mrs . Nosebag , who tormented him all the way
with questions , on several occasions almost finding him out , and once at
least narrowly escaping giving him an introduction to a recruiting
sergeant of his own regiment . 

However , in spite of all risks , he arrived safely under Colonel Talbot's
roof , where he found that , though the news of his father's death was
indeed true , yet his own conduct certainly had nothing to do with the
matter--nor was Sir Everard in the slightest present danger . 

Whereupon , much relieved as to his family , Edward proclaimed his
intention of returning to Scotland as soon as possible--not indeed to
join with the rebels again , but for the purpose of seeking out Rose
Bradwardine and conducting her to a place of safety . 

It was not , perhaps , the wisest course he might have pursued . But during
his lonely stay at Farmer Williams's farm , Edward's heart had turned
often and much to Rose . He could not bear to think of her alone and
without protection . By means of a passport ( which had been obtained for
one Frank Stanley , Colonel Talbot's nephew ) , Waverley was able easily to
reach Edinburgh . Here from the landlady , with whom he and Fergus had
lodged , Edward first heard the dread news of Culloden , of the slaughter
of the clans , the flight of the Prince , and , worst of all , how Fergus
and Evan Dhu , captured the night of the skirmish , were presently on
trial for their lives at Carlisle . Flora also was in Carlisle , awaiting
the issue of the trial , while with less certainty Rose Bradwardine was
reported to have gone back to her father's mansion of Tully-Veolan . 
Concerning the brave old Baron himself , Edward could get no news , save
that he had fought most stoutly at Culloden , but that the government
were particularly bitter against him because he had been '_out_'
twice--that is , he had taken part both in the first rising of the year
1715 , and also in that which had just been put down in blood at
Culloden . 

Without a moment's hesitation , Edward set off for Tully-Veolan , and
after one or two adventures he arrived there , only to find the white
tents of a military encampment whitening the moor above the village . The
house itself had been sacked . Part of the stables had been burned , while
the only living being left about the mansion of Tully-Veolan was no
other than poor Davie Gellatley , who , chanting his foolish songs as
usual , greeted Edward with the cheering intelligence that "_A' were dead
and gane--Baron--Bailie--Saunders Saunderson--and Lady Rose that sang
sae sweet ! _"

However , it was not long before he set off at full speed , motioning
Waverley to follow him . The innocent took a difficult and dangerous path
along the sides of a deep glen , holding on to bushes , rounding perilous
corners of rock , till at last the barking of dogs directed them to the
entrance of a wretched hovel . Here Davie's mother received Edward with a
sullen fierceness which the young man could not understand--till , from
behind the door , holding a pistol in his hand , unwashed , gaunt , and
with a three weeks' beard fringing his hollow cheeks , he saw come
forth--the Baron of Bradwardine himself . 

After the first gladsome greetings were over , the old man had many a
tale to tell his young English friend . But his chief grievance was not
his danger of the gallows , nor the discomfort of his hiding-place , but
the evil-doing of his cousin , to whom , as it now appeared , the Barony of
Bradwardine now belonged . Malcolm of Inch-Grabbit had , it appeared , come
to uplift the rents of the Barony . But the country people , being
naturally indignant that he should have so readily taken advantage of
the misfortune of his kinsman , received him but ill . Indeed , a shot was
fired at the new proprietor by some unknown marksman in the gloaming , 
which so frightened the heir that he fled at once to Stirling and had
the estate promptly advertised for sale . 

"In addition to which , " continued the old man , "though I bred him up
from a boy , he hath spoken much against me to the great folk of the
time , so that they have sent a company of soldiers down here to destroy
all that belongs to me , and to hunt his own blood-kin like a partridge
upon the mountains . "

"Aye , " cried Janet Gellatley , "and if it had not been for my poor Davie
there , they would have catched the partridge , too ! "

Then with a true mother's pride Janet told the story of how the poor
innocent had saved his master . The Baron was compelled by the strictness
of the watch to hide , all day and most of the nights , in a cave high up
in a wooded glen . 

"A comfortable place enough , " the old woman explained; "for the goodman
of Corse-Cleugh has filled it with straw . But his Honour tires of it , 
and he comes down here whiles for a warm at the fire , or at times a
sleep between the blankets . But once , when he was going back in the
dawn , two of the English soldiers got a glimpse of him as he was
slipping into the wood and banged off a gun at him . I was out on them
like a hawk , crying if they wanted to murder a poor woman's innocent
bairn ! Whereupon they swore down my throat that they had seen 'the auld
rebel himself , ' as they called the Baron . But my Davie , that some folk
take for a simpleton , being in the wood , caught up the old grey cloak
that his Honour had dropped to run the quicker , and came out from among
the trees as we were speaking , majoring and play-acting so like his
Honour that the soldier-men were clean beguiled , and even gave me
sixpence to say nothing about their having let off their gun at 'poor
crack-brained Sawney , ' as they named my Davie ! "

It was not till this long tale was ended that Waverley heard what he had
come so far to find out--that Rose was safe in the house of a Whig
Laird , an old friend of her father's , and that the Bailie , who had early
left the army of the Prince , was trying his best to save something out
of the wreck for her . 

The next morning Edward went off to call on Bailie Macwheeble . At first
the man of law was not very pleased to see him , but when he learned that
Waverley meant to ask Rose to be his wife , he flung his best wig out of
the window and danced the Highland fling for very joy . This rejoicing
was a little marred by the fact that Waverley was still under
proscription . But when a messenger of the Bailie's had returned from the
nearest post-town with a letter from Colonel Talbot , all fear on this
account was at an end . Colonel Talbot had , though with the greatest
difficulty , obtained royal Protections for both the Baron of Bradwardine
and for Edward himself . There was no doubt that full pardons would
follow in due course . 

Right thankfully the Baron descended from his cave , as soon as Edward
carried him the good news , and with Davie Gellatley and his mother , all
went down to the house of Bailie Macwheeble , where supper was
immediately served . 

It was from old Janet Gellatley , Davie's mother , that Waverley learned
whom he had to thank for rescuing him from the hands of Captain Gifted
Gilfillan , and to whom the gentle voice belonged which had cheered him
during his illness . It was none other than Rose Bradwardine herself . To
her , Edward owed all . She had even given up her jewels to Donald Bean
Lean , that he might go scatheless . She it was who had provided a nurse
for him in the person of old Janet Gellatley herself , and lastly she had
seen him safely on his way to Holyrood under the escort of the sulky
Laird of Balmawhapple . 

So great kindness certainly required very special thanks . And Edward was
not backward in asking the Baron for permission to accompany him to the
house of Duchran , where Rose was at present residing . So well did Edward
express his gratitude to Rose , that she consented to give all her life
into his hands , that he might go on showing how thankful he was . 

Of course the marriage could not take place for some time , because the
full pardons of the Baron and Edward took some time to obtain . For
Fergus Mac-Ivor , alas , no pardon was possible . He and Evan Dhu were
condemned to be executed for high treason at Carlisle , and all that
Edward could do was only to promise the condemned Chieftain that he
would be kind to the poor clansmen of Vich Ian Vohr , for the sake of his
friend . 

As for Evan Dhu , he might have escaped . The Judge went the length of
offering to show mercy , if Evan would only ask it . But when Evan Dhu was
called upon to plead before the Court , his only request was that he
might be permitted to go down to Glennaquoich and bring up six men to be
hanged in the place of Vich Ian Vohr . 

"And , " he said , "ye may begin with me the first man ! "

At this there was a laugh in the Court . But Evan , looking about him
sternly , added: "If the Saxon gentlemen are laughing because a poor man
such as me thinks my life , or the life of any six of my degree , is worth
that of Vich Ian Vohr , they may be very right . But if they laugh because
they think I would not keep my word , and come back to redeem him , I can
tell them they ken neither the heart of a Hielandman nor the honour of a
gentleman ! "

After these words , there was no more laughing in that Court . 

Nothing now could save Fergus Mac-Ivor . The government were resolved on
his death as an example , and both he and Evan were accordingly executed , 
along with many others of the unhappy garrison of Carlisle . 

 * * * * *

Edward and Rose were married from the house of Duchran , and some days
after they started , according to the custom of the time , to spend some
time upon an estate which Colonel Talbot had bought , as was reported , a
very great bargain . The Baron had been persuaded to accompany them , 
taking a place of honour in their splendid coach and six , the gift of
Sir Everard . The coach of Mr . Rubrick of Duchran came next , full of
ladies , and many gentlemen on horseback rode with them as an escort to
see them well on their way . 

At the turning of the road which led to Tully-Veolan , the Bailie met
them . He requested the party to turn aside and accept of his hospitality
at his house of Little Veolan . The Baron , somewhat put out , replied that
he and his son-in-law would ride that way , but that they would not bring
upon him the whole matrimonial procession . It was clear , however , that
the Baron rather dreaded visiting the ancient home of his ancestors , 
which had been so lately sold by the unworthy Malcolm of Inch-Grabbit
into the hands of a stranger . But as the Bailie insisted , and as the
party evidently wished to accept , he could not hold out . 

When the Baron arrived at the avenue , he fell into a melancholy
meditation , thinking doubtless of the days when he had taken such pride
in the ancient Barony which had passed for ever away from the line of
the Bradwardines . From these bitter thoughts he was awakened by the
sight of the two huge stone bears which had been replaced over the
gate-posts . 

Then down the avenue came the two great deer-hounds , Ban and Buscar , 
which had so long kept their master company in his solitude , with Daft
Davie Gellatley dancing behind them . 

The Baron was then informed that the present owner of the Barony was no
other than Colonel Talbot himself . But that if he did not care to visit
the new owner of Bradwardine , the party would proceed to Little Veolan , 
the house of Bailie Macwheeble . 

Then , indeed , the Baron had need of all his greatness of mind . But he
drew a long breath , took snuff abundantly , and remarked that as they had
brought him so far , he would not pass the Colonel's gate , and that he
would be happy to see the new master of his tenants . When he alighted in
front of the Castle , the Baron was astonished to find how swiftly the
marks of spoliation had been removed . Even the roots of the felled trees
had disappeared . All was fair and new about the house of Tully-Veolan , 
even to the bright colours of the garb of Davie Gellatley , who ran first
to one and then to the other of the company , passing his hands over his
new clothes and crying , "Braw , braw Davie ! "

The dogs , Bran and Buscar , leaping upon him , brought tears into the
Baron's eyes , even more than the kind welcome of Colonel Talbot's wife , 
the Lady Emily . Still more astonishing appeared the changes in the so
lately ruined courtyard . The burned stables had been rebuilt upon a
newer and better plan . The pigeon-house was restocked , and populous with
fluttering wings . Even the smallest details of the garden , and the
multitude of stone bears on the gables , had all been carefully restored
as of old . 

The Baron could hardly believe his eyes , and he marvelled aloud that
Colonel Talbot had not thought fit to replace the Bradwardine arms by
his own . But here the Colonel , suddenly losing patience , declared that
he would not , even to please these foolish boys , Waverley and Frank
Stanley ( and his own more foolish wife ) , continue to impose upon another
old soldier . So without more ado he told the Baron that he had only
advanced the money to buy back the Barony , and that he would leave
Bailie Macwheeble to explain to whom the estate really belonged . 

Trembling with eagerness the Bailie advanced , a formidable roll of
papers in his hand . 

He began triumphantly to explain that Colonel Talbot had indeed bought
Bradwardine , but that he had immediately exchanged it for Brere-wood
Lodge , which had been left to Edward under his father's will . 
Bradwardine had therefore returned to its ancient Lord in full and
undisputed possession , and the Baron was once more master of all his
hereditary powers , subject only to an easy yearly payment to his
son-in-law . 

Tears were actually in the old gentleman's eyes as he went from room to
room , so that he could scarce speak a word of welcome either to the
guests within , or of thanks to the rejoicing farmers and cottars who , 
hearing of his return , had gathered without . The climax of his joy was , 
however , reached when the Blessed Bear of Bradwardine itself , the
golden cup of his line , mysteriously recovered out of the spoil of the
English army by Frank Stanley , was brought to the Baron's elbow by old
Saunders Saunderson . 

Truth to tell , the recovery of this heirloom afforded the old man almost
as much pleasure as the regaining of his Barony , and there is little
doubt that a tear mingled with the wine , as , holding the Blessed Bear in
his hand , the Baron solemnly proposed the healths of the united families
of Waverley-Honour and Bradwardine . 
