I. LOVEL FIGHTS A DUEL

THE Antiquary, to whom Lovel told his dream, promptly pulled out a
black-letter volume of great age and, unclasping it, showed him the very
motto of his vision. So far, however, from glowing with fire now, the
words remained in the ordinary calm chill of type. But when the
Antiquary told him that these words had been the Printer's Mark or
Colophon of his ancestor, Aldobrand Oldenbuck, the founder of his house,
and that they meant "SKILL WINS FAVOUR," Lovel, though half ashamed of
giving any credit to dreams, resolved to remain in the neighbourhood of
Knockwinnock Castle and of Miss Wardour for at least some time longer.

In vain Oldbuck made light of his vision of the Green Room. In vain he
reminded him that he had been showing that very volume to Sir Arthur the
night before in his presence, and had even remarked upon the appropriate
motto of old Aldobrand Oldenbuck.

Lovel was resolved to give his love for Miss Wardour one more chance.
And indeed at that very moment, under the lady's window at Knockwinnock
Castle, a strange love messenger was pleading his cause.

Miss Wardour had been trying to persuade old Edie Ochiltree to accept a
garden, a cottage, and a daily dole, for his great services in saving
her own and her father's life. But of this Edie would hear nothing.

"I would weary," he said, "to be forever looking up at the same beams
and rafters, and out upon the same cabbage patch. I have a queer humour
of my own, too, and I might be jesting and scorning where I should be
silent. Sir Arthur and I might not long agree. Besides, what would the
country do for its gossip--the blithe clatter at e'en about the fire?
Who would bring news from one farm-town to another--gingerbread to the
lassies, mend fiddles for the lads, and make grenadier caps of rushes
for the bairns, if old Edie were tied by the leg at his own cottage
door?"

"Well, then, Edie," said Miss Wardour, "if this be so, if you feel that
the folk of the countryside cannot do without you, you must just let me
know when you feel old enough to settle, and in the meantime take this."

And she handed him a sum of money. But for the second time again the
beggar refused.

"Na, na," he said, "it is against our rule to take so muckle siller at
once. I would be robbed and murdered for it at the next town--or at
least I would go in fear of my life, which is just as bad. But you might
say a good word for me to the ground-officer and the constable, and
maybe bid Sandy Netherstanes the miller chain up his big dog, and I will
e'en come to Knockwinnock as usual for my alms and my snuff."

Edie paused at this point, and, stepping nearer to the window on which
Miss Wardour leaned, he continued, speaking almost in her ear.

"Ye are a bonny young leddy, and a good one," he said, "and maybe a
well-dowered one. But do not you sneer away the laddie Lovel, as ye did
a while syne on the walk beneath the Briery bank, when I both saw ye
and heard ye too, though ye saw not me. Be canny with the lad, for he
loves ye well. And it's owing to him, and not to anything I could have
done, that you and Sir Arthur were saved yestreen!"

Then, without waiting for an answer, old Edie stalked toward a low
doorway and disappeared. It was at this very moment that Lovel and the
Antiquary entered the court. Miss Wardour had only time to hasten
upstairs, while the Antiquary was pausing to point out the various
features of the architecture of Knockwinnock Castle to the young man.

Miss Wardour met the two gentlemen in the drawing-room of the castle
with her father's apology for not being able to receive them. Sir Arthur
was still in bed, and, though recovering, he continued to suffer from
the fatigues and anxieties of the past night.

"Indeed," said the Antiquary, "a good down pillow for his good white
head were a couch more meet than Bessie's Apron, plague on her! But what
news of our mining adventure in Glen Withershins?"

"None," said Miss Wardour, "or at least no good news! But here are some
specimens just sent down. Will you look at them?"

And withdrawing into a corner with these bits of rock, the Antiquary
proceeded to examine them, grumbling and pshawing over each ere he laid
it aside to take up another. This was Lovel's opportunity to speak alone
with Miss Wardour.

"I trust," he said, "that Miss Wardour will impute to circumstances
almost irresistible, this intrusion of one who has reason to think
himself so unacceptable a visitor."

"Mr. Lovel," said Miss Wardour, in the same low tone, "I am sure you are
incapable of abusing the advantages given you by the services you have
rendered us--ah, if I could only see you as a friend--or as a sister!"

"I cannot," said Lovel, "disavow my feelings. They are well known to
Miss Wardour. But why crush every hope--if Sir Arthur's objections could
be removed?"

"But that is impossible," said Miss Wardour, "his objections cannot be
removed, and I am sure you will save both of us pain by leaving
Fairport, and returning to the honourable career which you seem to have
abandoned!"

"Miss Wardour," said Lovel, "I will obey your wishes, if, within one
little month I cannot show you the best of reasons for continuing to
abide at Fairport."

At this moment Sir Arthur sent down a message to say that he would like
to see his old friend, the Laird of Monkbarns, in his bedroom. Miss
Wardour instantly declared that she would show Mr. Oldbuck the way, and
so left Lovel to himself. It chanced that in the interview which
followed Sir Arthur let out by accident that his daughter had already
met with Lovel in Yorkshire, when she had been there on a visit to her
aunt. The Antiquary was at first astonished, and then not a little
indignant, that neither of them should have told him of this when they
were introduced, and he resolved to catechise his young friend Lovel
strictly upon the point as soon as possible. But when at last he bade
farewell to his friend Sir Arthur and returned below, another subject
occupied his mind. Lovel and he were walking home over the cliffs, and
when they reached the summit of the long ridge, Oldbuck turned and
looked back at the pinnacles of the castle--at the ancient towers and
walls grey with age, which had been the home of so many generations of
Wardours.

"Ah," he muttered, sighing, half to himself, "it wrings my heart to say
it--but I doubt greatly that this ancient family is fast going to the
ground."

Then he revealed to the surprised Lovel how Sir Arthur's foolish
speculations, and especially his belief in a certain German swindler,
named Dousterswivel, had caused him to engage in some very costly mining
ventures, which were now almost certain to result in complete failure.

As the Antiquary described Dousterswivel, Lovel remembered to have seen
the man in the inn at Fairport, where he had been pointed out to him as
one of the _illuminati_, or persons who have dealings with the dwellers
in another world. But while thus talking and tarrying with his friend
Monkbarns, an important letter was on its way to call Lovel back to
Fairport. Oldbuck had so far taken his young friend to his heart, that
he would not let him depart without making sure that the trouble he read
on Lovel's face was not the want of money.

"If," he said, "there is any pecuniary inconvenience, I have fifty, or a
hundred, guineas at your service--till Whitsunday--or indeed as long as
you like!"

But Lovel, assuring him that the letter boded no difficulty of the
kind, thanked him for his offer, and so took his leave.

It was some weeks before the Antiquary again saw Lovel. To the great
astonishment of the town the young man hardly went out at all, and when
he called upon him in his lodgings at Fairport, Mr. Oldbuck was
astonished at the change in his appearance. Lovel was now pale and thin,
and his black dress bore the badge of mourning. The Antiquary's gruff
old heart was moved toward the lad. He would have had him come instantly
with him to Monkbarns, telling him that, as they agreed well together,
there was no reason why they should ever separate. His lands were in his
own power of gift, and there was no reason why he should not leave them
to whom he would.

Lovel, touched also by this unexpected affection, answered that he could
not at present accept, but that before leaving Scotland he would
certainly pay Monkbarns a long visit.

While the Antiquary remained talking thus to Lovel in his lodgings, a
letter was brought from Sir Arthur Wardour inviting the young man to be
a member of a party which proposed to visit the ruins of St. Ruth's
Priory on the following day, and afterward to dine and spend the
evening at Knockwinnock Castle. Sir Arthur added that he had made the
same proposal to the family at Monkbarns. So it was agreed that they
should go together, Lovel on horseback, and Oldbuck and his womenkind
(as he called them) in a hired post-chaise.

The morning of the next day dawned clear and beautiful, putting Lovel in
better spirits than he had known of late. With the Wardour party there
came the German adept, Mr. Dousterswivel, to whom, after offering his
thanks to his preserver of the night of storm, Sir Arthur introduced
Lovel. The young man's instinctive dislike at sight of the impostor was
evidently shared in by the Antiquary, for the lowering of his shaggy
eyebrow clearly proclaimed as much.

Nevertheless, the first part of the day went well on the whole. Oldbuck
took upon himself the office of guide, explaining and translating all
the while, leading the company from point to point till they were almost
as much at home as himself among the ruins of the Priory of St. Ruth.

But the peaceful occupations of the day were interrupted by the arrival
of a young horseman in military undress, whom the Antiquary greeted with
the words, "Hector, son of Priam, whence comest thou?"

"From Fife, my liege," answered Captain Hector MacIntyre, Mr. Oldbuck's
nephew, who saluted the company courteously, but, as Lovel thought,
seemed to view his own presence with a haughty and disapproving eye.
Captain MacIntyre attached himself immediately to Miss Wardour, and even
appeared to Lovel to take up a privileged position with regard to her.
But Miss Wardour, after submitting to this close attendance for some
time, presently turned sharply round, and asked a question of the
Antiquary as to the date at which the Priory of St. Ruth was built. Of
course Mr. Oldbuck started off like a warhorse at the sound of the
trumpet, and, in the long harangue which ensued, mixed as it was with
additions and contradictions from Sir Arthur and the minister, Captain
MacIntyre found no further chance of appropriating Miss Wardour. He left
her, accordingly, and walked sulkily by his sister's side.

From her he demanded to know who this Mr. Lovel might be, whom he found
so very much at home in a circle in which he had looked forward to
shining alone.

Mary MacIntyre answered sensibly that, as to who he was, her brother had
better ask his uncle, who was in the habit of inviting to his house such
company as pleased him; adding that, so far as she knew, Mr. Lovel was a
very quiet and gentlemanly young man.

Far from being satisfied, however, from that moment Captain MacIntyre,
with the instinct of a dog that returns home to find a stranger making
free with his bone and kennel, set himself almost openly to provoke
Lovel. When by chance the latter was called on by the Antiquary to state
whether or not he had been present at a certain battle abroad,
MacIntyre, with an accent of irony, asked the number of his regiment.
And when that had been told him, he replied that he knew the regiment
very well, but that he could not remember Mr. Lovel as an officer in it.

Whereupon, blushing quickly, Mr. Lovel informed Captain MacIntyre that
he had served the last campaign on the staff of General Sir Blank Blank.

"Indeed," said MacIntyre, yet more insolently, "that is still more
remarkable. I have had an opportunity of knowing the names of all the
officers who have held such a situation, and I cannot recollect that of
Lovel among them."

Lovel took out of his pocket-book a letter, from which he removed the
envelope before handing it to his adversary.

"In all probability you know the General's hand," he said, "though I own
I ought not to show such exaggerated expressions of thanks for my very
slight services."

Captain MacIntyre, glancing his eye over it, could not deny that it was
in the General's hand, but drily observed, as he returned it, that the
address was wanting.

"The address, Captain MacIntyre," answered Lovel, in the same tone,
"shall be at your service whenever you choose to inquire for it."

"I shall not fail to do so," said the soldier.

"Come, come," exclaimed Oldbuck, "what is the meaning of this? We'll
have no swaggering, youngsters! Are you come from the wars abroad to
stir up strife in a peaceful land?"

Sir Arthur, too, hoped that the young men would remain calm. But Lovel,
from that moment, felt that he was to some extent under suspicion, and
so, in a short time, he took the opportunity of bidding the company
good-bye, on the plea of the return of a headache which had lately
troubled him. He had not ridden far--rather loitering, indeed, to give
MacIntyre a chance of overtaking him--when the sound of horse's hoofs
behind told him that his adversary had returned to find him. The young
officer touched his hat briefly, and began in a haughty tone, "What am I
to understand, sir, by your telling me that your address was at my
service?"

"Simply," answered Lovel, "that my name is Lovel, and that my residence
is, for the present, Fairport, as you will see by this card!"

"And is this," said the soldier, "all the information you are disposed
to give me?"

"I see no right you have to require more."

"I find you, sir, in company with my sister," said MacIntyre, "and I
have a right to know who is admitted to her society."

"I shall take the liberty of disputing that right," replied Lovel, to
the full as haughty in tone and manner.

"I presume then," said the young officer, "since you _say_ you have
served in his Majesty's army, you will give me the satisfaction usual
among gentlemen."

"I shall not fail," said Lovel.

"Very well, sir," rejoined Hector, and turning his horse's head he
galloped off to rejoin the party.

But his uncle suspected his purpose, and was determined to prevent a
duel at all risks. He demanded where his nephew had been.

"I forgot my glove, sir," said Hector.

"Forgot your glove! You mean that you went to throw it down. But I will
take order with you, young gentleman. You shall return with me this
night to Monkbarns."

Yet in spite of the Antiquary the duel was easily enough arranged
between these two over-hasty young men. It was the custom of the time to
fight about trifles, and it seemed to Lovel that as a soldier he had
really no honourable alternative. He was fortunate enough to find a
second in the Lieutenant-commander of one of the King's gun-brigs,
which was stationed on the coast to put down smuggling. Lieutenant
Taffril only put one question to Lovel before offering him every
assistance. He asked if there was anything whereof he was ashamed, in
the circumstances which he had declined to communicate to MacIntyre.

"On my honour, no," said Lovel, "there is nothing but what, in a short
time, I hope I may be able to communicate to the whole world."

The duel thus insolently provoked was to be fought with pistols within
the ruins of St. Ruth, and as Lovel and his second came near the place
of combat, they heard no sound save their own voices mingling with those
of the sheep bleating peacefully to each other upon the opposite hill.
On the stump of an old thorn tree within the ruins sat the venerable
figure of old Edie Ochiltree. Edie had a message to deliver.

He told Lovel that he had been at the Sheriff's that very day, and had
got it from the clerk himself that a warrant had been issued on
Monkbarns's demand for the apprehension of Lovel. The old beggar had
come hastily to warn the young man, thinking that perhaps it might be
some matter of debt. But the appearance of Captain MacIntyre and his
second, Mr. Lesley, soon informed him otherwise.

The antagonists approached and saluted with the stern civility of the
place and occasion. MacIntyre instantly ordered the old fellow off the
field.

"I _am_ an auld fellow," said Edie, "but I am also an auld soldier of
your father's, and I served with him in the 42nd."

"Serve where you please," said MacIntyre, hotly, "you have no title to
intrude on us. Be off with you--or--"

He lifted his cane as if to threaten the old man. But the insult roused
Edie's ancient courage.

"Hold down your switch, Captain MacIntyre! I am an auld soldier, and
I'll tak' muckle from your father's son--but not a touch o' the wand
while my pike-staff will hold together!"

"I was wrong--I was wrong," said MacIntyre, relenting, "here is a crown
for you--go your ways."

But Edie refused the money, exhorting the young men to go and fight the
French instead of each other, if they were so fighting hot. But neither
his words nor the efforts of the seconds could reconcile MacIntyre to
the man with whom he had from the first resolved to quarrel.

The ground was measured out by the seconds, while old Edie stood
unheeded at the side muttering, "Bairns, bairns--madmen, I should rather
say! Weel, your blood be on your heads!"

The fatal signal was given. Both fired almost at the same moment.
Captain MacIntyre's ball grazed the side of his opponent, but failed to
draw blood. That of Lovel was more true to the aim. MacIntyre reeled and
fell. Raising himself on his arm, his first exclamation was: "It is
nothing--it is nothing! Give us the other pistols!"

But the moment after he added in a lower tone: "I believe I have enough,
and what's worse, I fear I deserve it. Mr. Lovel, or whatever your name
is, fly and save yourself. Bear witness all of you, I alone provoked the
quarrel."

Then raising himself on his arm, he added: "Shake hands, Lovel. I
believe you to be a gentleman--forgive my rudeness, and I forgive you my
death!"

Lovel stood dizzy and bewildered, while the ship's surgeon approached to
do his part. But presently his arm was grasped by Edie, who hurried him
off the field with the assistance of Lieutenant Taffril, his late
second.

"He is right--he is right!" exclaimed Taffril, "go with him--there, into
the wood--not by the highroad. Let him bring you to the sands at three
of the morning. A boat will be in waiting to take you off to my brig,
which will sail at once."

"Yes--fly--fly!" said the wounded man, his voice faltering as he spoke.

"It is madness to stay here," added Taffril.

"It was worse than madness ever to have come!" said Lovel, following his
uncouth guide into the thicket. As he went up the valley he realised the
bitterness of remorse that comes too late. He had passed that way in the
morning, innocent, and now--he had the stain of blood upon his hands.


II. THE SEEKERS OF TREASURE

Edie guided him along a deep ravine till they came to a precipice of
rock overhung with brushwood and copse. Here completely concealed was
the mouth of a cave, where, as Edie said, they would be in perfect
safety. Only two other persons knew of its existence, and these two were
at present far away. The cavern was in the shape of a cross, and had
evidently been the abode of some anchorite of a time long past. In the
corner was a turning stair, narrow but quite passable, which
communicated with the chapel above--and so, by a winding passage in the
thickness of the wall, with the interior of the priory of St. Ruth.

Twilight faded into night, and the night itself wore away, while Edie
sat telling Lovel all the old-world tales he could lay his tongue to, in
order to keep the mind of the young man from brooding over his
situation. They sat close together on a little watch-tower niched deep
in the wall, and breathed the night air, while waiting for the hour at
which they must betake them to the beach, to meet the boat which
Lieutenant Taffril was to have in readiness.

Midnight approached, the moon rose high in the sky above, but the voice
of the Blue-Gown still droned on, telling his tales of old time, when
suddenly Lovel, whose ears were quicker, laid his hand on his
companion's arm.

"Hush," he whispered, "I hear some one speaking!"

So saying Lovel pointed in the direction of the sound,--toward the door
of the chancel at the west end of the building, where a carved window
let in a flood of moonlight upon the floor.

Two human figures detached themselves from the darkness and advanced.
The lantern which one of them carried gleamed pale in the bright
moonlight. It was evident in a moment by their motions that they could
not be officers searching for Lovel. As they approached nearer, the
beggar recognised the two figures as those of Dousterswivel and Sir
Arthur.

Lovel was about to retreat, but a touch on the arm from the old
Blue-Gown convinced him that his best course was to remain quiet where
he was. In case of any alarm, there was always the passage behind, and
they could gain the shelter of the wood long before any pursuit would be
possible.

Dousterswivel was evidently making some proposition about which Sir
Arthur was uncertain.

"Great expense--great expense!" were the first words they heard him
mutter.

"Expenses--to be sure," said Dousterswivel; "there must be great
expenses. You do not expect to reap before you do sow the seed. Now, Sir
Arthur, you have sowed this night a little pinch of ten guineas, and if
you do not reap the big harvest, it is because you have only sowed a
little pinch of seed. Much seed sown, much harvest reaped. That is the
way to find treasure. You shall see, Sir Arthur, mine worthy patron!"

The German now put before his dupe a little silver plate engraved
with strange signs, squares of nine times nine figures, flying
serpents with turkey-cocks' heads, and other wonderful things.
Then having professed to lay out the baronet's ten guineas in what he
called "suffumigations,"--that is, to scare away the demons which kept
guard over the treasures,--he informed him that he was ready to proceed.
The treasure itself could not be obtained till the stroke of midnight.
But in the meanwhile he was willing to show Sir Arthur the guardian
demon of the treasure-house, which, "like one fierce watchdog" (as the
pretended wizard explained), could be called up by his magic power.

But Sir Arthur was not particularly keen to see such marvels. He thought
they had little enough time as it was, and if he could get the
treasures, he preferred, supposing it to be the same thing to his guide,
to let sleeping demons lie.

"But I could show you the spirit very well," said Dousterswivel. "I
would draw a circle with a pentagon, and make my suffumigation within
it, while you kept the demon at bay with a drawn sword. You would see
first a hole open in the solid wall. Then through it would come one stag
pursued by three black greyhounds. They would pull him down, and then
one black ugly negro would appear and take the stag from them. Then,
paff! all would be gone. After that horns would be winded, and in would
come the great Peolphan, the Mighty Hunter of the North, mounted on his
black steed--but you are sure that you do not care to see all this?"

"Why, I am not afraid," said the poor baronet, "that is, if--do any
mishaps ever happen on such occasions?"

"Bah--mischiefs, no!" said the German. "Sometimes if the circle be no
quite just, or the beholder be frightened and not hold the sword firm
and straight toward him, the Great Hunter will take his advantage, and
drag him exorcist out of the circle and throttle him. That happen
sometimes."

This was quite enough for Sir Arthur, who did not desire any intercourse
with demons on such terms.

Whereupon Dousterswivel, the time of midnight being near, set fire to a
little pile of chips, which instantly burned up with a bright light.
Then when the flame was at its highest, he cast into the blaze a handful
of perfumes which smoked with a strong and pungent odour. This made both
Dousterswivel and his pupil cough and sneeze heartily, and by and by,
the vapour mounting upward, it found out Lovel and Edie in their high
watch-tower, making them also sneeze loudly in their turn.

"Was that an echo? Or are there others present in this place?" cried the
baronet, astonished at the sound.

"No, no," said the German, who had so long employed himself with magic
that he had grown half to believe in it, "no--at least, I hope not!"

Here a complete fit of sneezing, together with a kind of hollow
grunting cough from Edie Ochiltree, so alarmed the wizard that he would
have fled at once, had not Sir Arthur prevented him by force.

"You juggling villain," cried the baronet, whom impending ruin made
desperate, "this is some trick of yours to get off fulfilling your
bargain. Show me the treasure you have promised, or by the faith of a
ruined man, I will send you where you will see spirits enough!"

"Consider, my honoured patron," said the now thoroughly frightened
treasure-seeker, "this is not the best treatment. And then the demons--"

At this moment Edie Ochiltree, entering fully into the spirit of the
scene, gave vent to a prolonged and melancholy howl.

Dousterswivel flung himself on his knees.

"Dear Sir Arthurs," he cried, "let us go--or at least let _me_ go!"

"No, you cheating scoundrel," cried the knight, unsheathing his sword,
"that shift shall not serve you. I will see the treasure before I leave
this place--or I will run my sword through you as an impostor, though
all the spirits of the dead should rise around us!"

"For the love of Heaven, be patient, mine honoured patron," said the
German, "you shall have all the treasure I knows of--you shall, indeed!
But do not speak about the spirits. It makes them angry!"

Muttering exorcisms and incantations all the while, Dousterswivel
proceeded to a flat stone in the corner, which bore on its surface the
carved likeness of an armed warrior.

He muttered to Sir Arthur: "Mine patrons, it is here! God save us all!"

Together they managed to heave up the stone, and then Dousterswivel with
a mattock and shovel proceeded to dig. He had not thrown out many
spadefuls, when something was heard to ring on the ground with the sound
of falling metal. Then the treasure-seeker, snatching up the object
which his mattock had thrown out, exclaimed: "On mine dear word, mine
patrons, this is all. I mean all that we can do to-night!"

"Let me see it," said Sir Arthur, sternly, "I will be satisfied--I will
judge with my own eyes!"

He held the object up in the light of the lantern. It was a small case
of irregular shape, which, from the joyful exclamation of the baronet,
seemed to be filled with coin.

"Ah!" said Sir Arthur; "this is good luck, indeed. This is a beginning.
We will try again at the very next change of the moon. That six hundred
pounds I owe to Goldieword would be ruin indeed unless I can find
something to meet it. But this puts new hope into me!"

But now Dousterswivel was more than ever eager to be gone, and he
hurried Sir Arthur away with his treasure, having only taken time to
thrust back the earth and replace the tombstone roughly in its place, so
as to leave no very obvious traces of the midnight search for treasure.


III. MISTICOT'S GRAVE

The hour of going to meet the boat was now approaching, and Edie
conducted Lovel by a solitary path through the woods to the sea-shore.
There in the first level beams of the rising sun, they saw the little
gun-brig riding at anchor in the offing. Taffril himself met his friend,
and eased Lovel's mind considerably by telling him that Captain
MacIntyre's wound, though doubtful, was far from desperate, and that he
trusted a short cruise would cover all the consequences of his
unfortunate encounter.

Lovel offered gold to the beggar, but Edie once more refused it,
declaring that he thought all the folk had "gone clean daft."

"I have had more gold offered to me these last two or three weeks," he
said, "than I have seen in all my life before. Na, na, take back your
guineas, and for luck let me have but one lily-white shilling!"

The boat put off toward the lieutenant's brig, impelled by six stout
rowers. Lovel saw the old beggar wave his blue bonnet to him, before
turning slowly about as if to resume his customary wanderings from farm
to farm, and from village to village.

 * * * * *

So excellently well did Captain MacIntyre progress toward recovery that
in a little while the Antiquary declared it clean impossible for him to
get a single bite of breakfast, or have his wig made decent, or a slice
of unburnt toast to eat--all because his womenfolk were in constant
attendance upon the wounded Captain, whose guns and spaniels filled the
house, and for whom even the faithful Caxon ran messages, while his own
master waited for him in his chamber, fuming and stamping the while.

But as his sister often said, and as all who knew him,
knew--"Monkbarns's bark was muckle waur than his bite."

But an unexpected visit from Sir Arthur soon gave the Antiquary other
matters to think about. The Baronet came, so he said, to ask his old
friend's advice about the disposal of a sum of money. The Antiquary
drew from a right-hand corner of his desk a red-covered book, of which
Sir Arthur hated the very sight, and suggested that if he had money to
dispose of, it might be as well to begin by clearing off encumbrances,
of which the debt marked in his own red book accounted for no less than
eleven hundred and thirteen pounds. But Sir Arthur put away the red book
as if Monkbarns had offered him so much physic, and hastened to say that
if the Antiquary would wait a few days, he would have the sum in
full--that is, if he would take it in bullion.

The Antiquary inquired from what Eldorado this treasure was forthcoming.

"Not far from here," said Sir Arthur, confidently, "and now I think of
it, you shall see the whole process in working, on one small condition."

"And what is that?" inquired the Antiquary.

"That it will be necessary to give me your friendly assistance, by
advancing the small sum of one hundred pounds."

The Antiquary, who had been rejoicing in the hope of getting both
principal and interest of a debt which he had long thought desperate,
could only gasp out the words, "Advance one hundred pounds!"

"Yes, my good sir," said Sir Arthur, "but upon the best possible
security of having it repaid in the course of a few days."

To this the Antiquary said nothing. He had heard the like before from
Sir Arthur's lips. So the Baronet went on to explain. "Mr. Dousterswivel
having discovered--"

But the Antiquary would not listen. His eyes sparkled with indignation.
"Sir Arthur," he said, "I have so often warned you against that rascally
quack, that I wonder you quote him to me!"

But this time Sir Arthur had something to show for his faith in the
expert. He placed a large ram's horn with a copper cover in his friend's
hand. It contained Scottish, English, and foreign coins of the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries. Most were silver but some were of gold, and, as
even the Antiquary allowed, of exceeding rarity.

"These," said the Baronet, "were found at midnight, at the last full
moon, in the ruins of St. Ruth's Priory, in the course of an experiment
of which I was myself the witness."

"Indeed," said Oldbuck, "and what means of discovery did you employ?"

"Only a simple suffumigation," said the Baronet, "accompanied by
availing ourselves of a suitable planetary hour."

"Simple suffumigation! Simple nonsensification! Planetary
hour--planetary fiddlestick! My dear Sir Arthur, the fellow has made a
gull of you under ground, and now he would make a gull of you above
ground!"

"Well, Mr. Oldbuck," said the Baronet, "I am obliged to you for your
opinion of my discernment, but you will at least give me credit for
seeing what I say I saw!"

"I will give you credit for saying that you saw what you _thought_ you
saw!"

"Well, then," said the Baronet, "as there is a heaven above us, Mr.
Oldbuck, I saw with my own eyes these coins dug out of the chancel of
St. Ruth's at midnight! And if I had not been there, I doubt if
Dousterswivel would have had the courage to go through with it!"

The Antiquary inquired how much the discovery had cost.

"Only ten guineas," said the Baronet, "but this time it is to cost a
hundred and fifty pounds, but of course the results will be in
proportion. Fifty I have already given him, and the other hundred I
thought you might be able to assist me with."

The Antiquary mused.

"This cannot be meant as a parting blow," he said; "it is not of
consequence enough. He will probably let you win this game also, as
sharpers do with raw gamesters. Sir Arthur, will you permit me to speak
to Dousterswivel? I think I can recover the treasure for you without
making any advance of money."

Dousterswivel had on his part no desire to see the Laird of Monkbarns.
He was more in fear of him than even of the spirits of the night. Still
he could not refuse, when summoned to leave Sir Arthur's carriage and
face the two gentlemen in the study at Monkbarns.

The Antiquary then and there told him that he and Sir Arthur proposed to
trench the whole area of the chancel of St. Ruth, in plain daylight,
with good substantial pickaxes and shovels, and so, without further
expense, ascertain for themselves the truth as to the existence of this
hidden treasure.

"Bah," said the German, "you will not find one copper thimble. But it is
as Sir Arthur likes--once I have showed him the real method. If he likes
to try others, he only loses the gold and the silver, that is all!"

The journey to the Priory was made in silence, each of the party having
enough on his mind to employ his thoughts. Edie Ochiltree joined them at
the ruins, and when the Antiquary pulled out of his pocket the ram's
horn in which the coins had been found, Edie claimed it at once for a
snuff-box of his which he had bartered with a miner at Mr.
Dousterswivel's excavations in Glen Withershins.

"And that brings it very near a certain friend of ours," said the
Antiquary to Sir Arthur. "I trust we shall be as successful to-day
without having to pay for it."

It was decided to begin operations at the tomb with the carven figure
on top--the same which Sir Arthur and Dousterswivel had disturbed on a
former occasion, but which neither the Antiquary nor Edie ever
remembered to have seen before. It appeared, however, that a large pile
of rubbish, which had formerly filled up the corner of the ruins, must
have been dispersed in order to bring it to light.

But the diggers reached the bottom of the grave, without finding either
treasure or coffin.

"Some cleverer chield has been before us," said one of the men.

But Edie pushed them impatiently aside, and leaping into the grave, he
cried, "Ye are good seekers, but bad finders!"

For the first stroke of his pike-staff into the bottom of the pit hit
upon something hard and resisting.

All now crowded around. The labourers resumed their task with good-will,
and soon a broad surface of wood was laid bare, and a heavy chest was
raised to the surface, the lid of which, being forced with a pickaxe,
displayed, beneath coarse canvas bags and under a quantity of oakum, a
large number of ingots of solid silver.

The Antiquary inspected them one by one, always expecting that the lower
layers would prove to be less valuable. But he was at last obliged to
admit that the Baronet had really and truly possessed himself of
treasure to the amount of about one thousand pounds.

It chanced that Edie Ochiltree had observed Dousterswivel stand somewhat
disconsolate and sad, looking into the open grave. Age had not dulled
Edie's wit, nor caused him to relish less a boyish prank. His quick eye
had caught some writing on the lid of the box of treasure, and while all
were admiring the solid ingots of precious metal laid bare before them,
Edie kicked the piece of wood aside without being observed by any one.

Then, with all due caution, he whispered to Dousterswivel that there
must certainly be more and better treasure yet to be brought to light in
the place where the silver had been found, and that if he would wait
only a little behind the others he would show him proof of it. When they
were alone he showed him on the lid of the treasure-chest the words,
written in black letter:

 "=Search--Number One="

Dousterswivel at once agreed to meet Edie at midnight within the ruins
of the Priory, and he kept his word. It was a stormy night, great clouds
being hurried across the face of the moon, and the woods were bending
and moaning in the fierce blast. Edie marched up and down while he
waited for the German, shouldering his pike-staff, and dreaming that he
was back again on the outposts with a dozen hostile riflemen hidden in
front of him.

After a little, Dousterswivel arrived, having brought with him a horse
and saddle-bags in which to carry away the expected treasure. Edie led
him once more to the place of the former search--to the grave of the
Armed Knight. On the way he told his companion the tale of that Malcolm
Misticot whose treasure was supposed to have been found and rifled that
day.

"There is a story that the Misticot walks," said Edie; "it's an awesome
nicht and an uncanny to be meeting the like of him here. Besides he
might not be best pleased to come upon us when we were trying to lift
his treasure!"

"For the love of Heaven," said Dousterswivel, "say nothing at all,
either about somebodies or nobodies!"

Edie leaped into the grave and began to strike; but he soon tired or
pretended to tire. So he called out to the German that turn and turn
about was fair play. Whereupon, fired with the desire for wealth,
Dousterswivel began to strike and shovel the earth with all his might,
while Edie encouraged him, standing very much at his ease by the side of
the hole.

"At it again," he cried; "strike--strike! What for are ye stopping,
man?"

"Stopping," cried the German, angrily, looking out of the grave at his
tormentor; "I am down at the bed-rock, I tell you!"

"And that's the likeliest place of any," said Edie; "it will just be a
big broad stone laid down to cover the treasure. Ah, that's it! There
was a Wallace stroke indeed! It's broken! Hurrah, boys, there goes
Ringan's pickaxe! It's a shame o' the Fairport folk to sell such frail
gear. Try the shovel; at it again, Maister Dousterdeevil!"

But this time the German, without replying, leaped out of the pit, and
shouted in a voice that trembled with anger, "Does you know, Mr. Edie
Ochiltree, who it is you are putting off your gibes and your jests upon?
You base old person, I will cleave your skull-piece with this shovels!"

"Ay," said Edie, "and where do ye think my pike-staff would be a' the
time?"

But Dousterswivel, growing more and more furious, heaved up the broken
pickaxe to smite his tormentor dead--which, indeed, he might have done
had not Edie, suddenly pointing with his hand, exclaimed in a stern
voice, "Do ye think that heaven and earth will suffer ye to murder an
auld man that gate--a man that might be your father? _Look behind you,
man!_"

Dousterswivel turned, and beheld, to his utter astonishment, a tall dark
figure standing close behind him. Whether this was the angry Misticot or
not, the newcomer certainly lifted a sturdy staff and laid it across the
rascal's back, bestowing on him half-a-dozen strokes so severe that he
fell to the ground, where he lay some minutes half unconscious with pain
and terror.

When the German came to himself, he was lying close to Misticot's open
grave on the soft earth which had been thrown out. He began to turn his
mind to projects of revenge. It must, he thought, be either Monkbarns or
Sir Arthur who had done this, in order to be revenged upon him. And his
mind finally deciding upon the latter, as most likely to have set Edie
Ochiltree on to deceive him, he determined from that moment to achieve
the ruin of his "dear and honoured patron" of the last five years.

As he left the precincts of the ruined Priory, he continued his vows of
vengeance against Edie and all associated with him. He had, he declared
aloud, been assaulted and murdered, besides being robbed of fifty pounds
as well. He would, on the very next day, put the law in motion "against
all the peoples"--but against Edie Ochiltree first of all.


A QUITE SUPERFLUOUS INTERLUDE

 The snow was now deep in the woods about the
 library. It lay sleek and drifted upon the paths,
 a broad-flaked, mortar-like snow, evidently
 produced on the borderland between thawing and
 freezing.

 "It is fine and buttery," said Hugh John, with a
 glance of intention at Sir Toady Lion, which was
 equal to any challenge ever sent from Douglas to
 Percy--or even that which Mr. Lesley carried for
 Hector MacIntyre to Mr. Lovel's Fairport lodgings.

 Sir Toady nodded with fierce willingness. He
 scented the battle from afar.

 "Ten yards then, twenty snowballs made before you
 begin, and then go as you please. But no rushing
 in, before first volley!"

 "And no holding the balls under the drip of the
 kitchen roof!" said Hugh John, who had suffered
 from certain Toady Lionish practices which
 personally he scorned.

 "Well, then," said I, "out you go in your jerseys
 for one hot half-hour. But no standing about,
 mind!"

 Sweetheart and Maid Margaret looked exceedingly
 wistful.

 "Of course," I said, "Sweetheart will want to go on
 with her knitting, but if she likes, the Maid can
 watch them from the window."

 "Oo-oh!" said Maid Margaret, "I _should_ like to go
 too!"

 "And I should not mind going either," admitted
 Sweetheart, "just to see that they did not hurt the
 Maid. They are such rough boys!"

 So it was arranged, as I had known it would be from
 the first. The snow was still falling, but the wind
 had gone down. There was to be no standing still,
 and afterward they were to change immediately for
 dinner. These were the conditions of permitted
 civil strife.

 "Please, is rolling in the snow permitted?" said
 Hugh John, to whom this was a condition of
 importance.

 "Why, yes," said I, "that is, if you catch the
 enemy out of his intrenchments."

 "Um-m-m-m!" said Hugh John, grimly rubbing his
 hands, "I'll catch him." In a lower tone he added,
 "And I'll teach him to put snowballs in the drip!"

 As he spoke, he mimicked the motions of one who
 shoves snow down inside the collar of his
 adversary.

 The cover of a deal box, with a soap advertisement
 on it, made a very fair intrenching tool, and soon
 formidable snow-works could be seen rising rapidly
 on the slopes of the clothes' drying ground,
 making a semicircle about that corner which
 contained the big iron swing, erect on its two tall
 posts. Hugh John and Maid Margaret, the attacking
 party, were still invisible, probably concocting a
 plan. But Sweetheart and Sir Toady, laughing and
 jesting as at some supreme stratagem, were busily
 employed throwing up the snow till it was nearly
 breast-high. The formation of the ground was in
 their favour. It fell away rapidly on all sides,
 except to the north, where the position was made
 impregnable by a huge prickly hedge.

 Nominally they were supposed to be enacting _The
 Antiquary_, but actually I could not see that the
 scene without bore any precise relation to what
 they had been hearing within. Perhaps, however, the
 day was too cold and stormy for standing upon the
 exactitudes of history.

 I did not remain all the time a spectator of the
 fray. The stated duel of twenty balls was over
 before I again reached the window. The combatants
 had entered upon the go-as-you-please stage.
 Indeed, I could gather so much even at my desk, by
 the confusion of yells and slogans emitted by the
 contending parties.

 Presently the cry of "It's not fair!" brought me to
 the window.

 Hugh John and Maid Margaret had evidently gained a
 certain preliminary success. For they had been able
 to reach a position from which (with long poles
 used at other times for the protection of the
 strawberry beds) they were enabled, under shelter
 themselves, to shake the branches of the big tree
 which overshadowed the swing and the position of
 the enemy. Every twig and branch was, of course,
 laden with snow, and masses fell in rapid
 succession upon the heads of the defenders. This
 was annoying at first, but at a word from Sir
 Toady, Sweetheart and he seized their intrenching
 tools, calling out: "Thank you--thank you! It's
 helping us so much! We've been wanting that badly!
 All our snow was gone, and we had to make balls off
 the ramparts. But now it's all right. Thank
 you--thank you!"

 The truth of this grew so evident that the baffled
 assailants retired to consult. Nothing better than
 a frontal attack, well sustained and driven home to
 the hilt, occurred to Hugh John; and, indeed, after
 all, that was the best thing that could happen on
 such a day. A yell, a charge, a quick batter of
 snowballs, and then a rush straight up the
 bank--Maid Margaret, lithe as a deer-hound,
 leading, her skirts kilted "as like a boy" as on
 the spur of the moment she could achieve with a
 piece of twine. Right on Sweetheart she rushed,
 who,--as in some sort her senior and legal
 protector,--of course, could not be very rough with
 her, nor yet use the methods customary and licensed
 between embattled brothers.

 But while the Maid thus held Sweetheart in play,
 Hugh John developed his stratagem. Leaning over the
 ramparts he seized Sir Toady by the collar, and
 then, throwing himself backward down the slope,
 confident in the thick blanketing of snow
 underneath, he dragged Sir Toady Lion along with
 him.

 "A prisoner--a prisoner!" he cried, both of them,
 captor and captive alike, being involved in a misty
 flurry of snow, which boiled up from the snowbank,
 in the midst of which they fraternally embraced, in
 that intimate tangle of legs and arms which only
 boys can achieve without breaking bones.

 "Back--come back!" rang out the order of the
 victorious Hugh John. "Sit on him--sit on him
 hard!"

 Thus, and not otherwise, was Sir Toady captured
 and Sweetheart left alone in the shattered
 intrenchments, which a little before had seemed so
 impregnable. Now in these snow wars, and, indeed,
 in all the combattings of the redoubtable four, it
 was the rule that a captive belonged to the side
 which took him, from the very moment of his giving
 in. He must utterly renounce his former allegiance,
 and fight for his new party as fiercely as formerly
 he had done against them. This is the only way of
 decently prolonging strife when the combatants are
 well matched, but various prejudices stand in the
 way of applying it to international conflicts.

 In this fashion was Sweetheart left alone in the
 fort which she and Sir Toady had constructed with
 such complete confidence. She did not, however,
 show the least fear, being a young lady of a
 singularly composed mind. On the other hand, she
 set herself to repair the various breaches in the
 walls, and so far as might be to contract them, so
 that she would have less space to defend. Then she
 sat sedately down on the swing and rocked herself
 to and fro to keep warm, till the storm should
 break on her devoted head.

 It broke! With unanimous yell, an army, formidable
 by being exactly three times her own numbers,
 rushed across the level space, waving flags and
 shouting in all the stern and headlong glory of the
 charge. Snowballs were discharged at the bottom of
 the glacis, the slope was climbed, and the enemy
 arrived almost at the very walls, before Sweetheart
 made a motion. There was something uncanny about
 it. She did not even dodge the balls. For one thing
 they were very badly aimed, and her chief safety
 was in sitting still. They were, you see, aiming at
 her.

 It soon became evident, however, that the works
 must be stormed. Still Sweetheart had made no
 motion to resist, except that, still seated on the
 broad board of the swing, she had gradually pushed
 herself back as far as she could go without losing
 her foothold on the ground.

 "She's afraid!--She is retreating! On--on!"

 No, Hugh John, for once your military genius has
 been at fault. For at the very moment when the
 snowy walls were being scaled, Sweetheart suddenly
 lifted her feet from the ground. The swing, pushed
 back to the limit of its chains, glided smoothly
 forward. One solidly shod boot-sole took Hugh John
 full on the chest. Another "plunked" Sir Toady in a
 locality which he held yet more tender, especially,
 as now, before dinner. Both warriors shot backward
 as if discharged from a petard, disappearing from
 view down the slope into the big drifts at the
 foot. Maid Margaret, who had not been touched at
 all, but who had stood (as it were) in the very
 middle of affairs, uttered one terrified yell and
 bolted.

 "Time!" cried the umpire, appearing in the
 doorway.

 The baffled champions entered first. While
 changing, they had got ready at least twenty
 complete explanations of their downfall.
 Sweetheart, coming in a little late, sat down to
 her sewing, and listened placidly with a faint,
 sweet, far-away smile which seemed to say that
 knitting, though an occupation despised by boys,
 does not wholly obscure the intellect. But she did
 not say a word.

 Her brothers somehow found this attitude
 excessively provoking.

 * * * * *

 Thus exercised in mind and body, and presently also
 fortified by the mid-day meal, the company declared
 its kind readiness to hear the rest of _The
 Antiquary_. It was not _Rob Roy_, of course--but a
 snowy day brought with it certain compensations. So
 to the crackle of the wood fire and the click and
 shift of the knitting needles, I began the final
 tale from _The Antiquary_.






###
