I . IN THE HANDS OF THE PHILISTINES

AFTER the victory of the Highlanders and the drowning of Morris the spy , 
it was for some little while touch-and-go whether the Bailie and Frank
should be made to follow him to the bottom of the loch . But at last
Frank was ordered to go as an ambassador to those who had captured Rob
Roy , while the Bailie with Captain Thornton and all the other prisoners
remained as hostages in the hands of the victorious Helen . 

This was the message he was to carry to the Sassenach . 

The whole district of the Lennox would be ravished if the Mac-Gregor
were not set free within twelve hours . Farmhouses would be burned , 
stack-yard and byre made desolate . In every house there would be a
crying of the death wail--the coronach of sorrow . Furthermore , to begin
with , Helen Mac-Gregor promised that if her request was not granted
within the time specified , she would send them this Glasgow Bailie , with
the Saxon Captain , and all the captive soldiers , bundled together in a
plaid , and chopped into as many pieces as there were checks in the
tartan ! 

When the angry Chieftainess paused in her denunciations , the cool level
voice of the soldier struck in: "Give my compliments--Captain Thornton's
of the Royal's--to the commanding officer , and tell him to do his duty
and secure his prisoner , without wasting a thought on me . If I have been
fool enough to let myself be led into this trap , I am at least wise
enough to know how to die for it without disgracing the service . I am
only sorry for my poor fellows , " he added , "fallen into such butcherly
hands ! "

But the Bailie's message was far different in tone . 

"Whisht , man , whisht , " he cried , "are ye weary of your life ? Ye'll gie
_my_ service , Bailie Nicol Jarvie's service--a magistrate o' Glasgow , as
his father was before him--to the commanding officer , and tell him that
there are here a wheen honest men in sore trouble , and like to come to
mair . And tell him that the best thing he can do for the common good is
just to let Rob come his ways up the glen , and nae mair about it ! There
has been some ill done already , but as it has lighted mostly on the
exciseman Morris it will not be muckle worth making a stir about ! "

So young Hamish Mac-Gregor led Frank Osbaldistone across the mountains
to the place where his father's captors , the horsemen of the Lennox , had
taken up their position on a rocky eminence , where they would be safe
from any sudden attack of the mountaineers . 

Before parting he made Frank promise not to reveal , either who had
guided him thither , or where he had parted from his conductor . Happily
Frank was not asked either of these questions . He and Andrew ( who , in a
tattered cloak and with a pair of brogues on his feet , looked like a
Highland scarecrow ) were soon perceived by the sentries and conducted to
the presence of the commanding officer , evidently a man of rank , in a
steel cuirass , crossed by the ribband of the Thistle , to whom the
others seemed to pay great deference . This proved to be no other than
his Grace the Duke of Montrose , who in person had come to conduct the
operations against his enemy , Rob Roy . 

Frank's message was instantly listened to , and very clearly and
powerfully he pointed out what would occur if Rob Roy were not suffered
to depart . But the Duke bade him return to those who sent him , and tell
them that if they touched so much as a hair upon the heads of their
hostages , he would make their glens remember it for a hundred years . As
for Rob Roy , he must surely die ! 

But Frank Osbaldistone pointed out that to return with such a message
would be to go to certain death , and pleaded for some reply which might
save the lives of Captain Thornton , the Bailie , and the soldiers who
were captive in Helen Mac-Gregor's hands upon the hostile shores of Loch
Ard . 

"Why , if you cannot go yourself , send your servant ! " returned the Duke . 
At which Andrew burst forth . He had had , he said , enough and to spare of
Highland hospitality . 

"The deil be in my feet , " quoth Andrew , "if I go the length of my toe
on such an errand . Do the folk think I have a spare windpipe in my
pocket , after John Highlandman has slit this one with his jocteleg ? Or
that I can dive down at one side of a Highland loch and come up at the
other like a sheldrake ? Na , na , every one for himself , and God for us
all ! Folk may just go on their own errands . Rob Roy is no concern of
mine . He never came near my native parish of Dreepdaily to steal either
pippin or pear from me or mine ! "

The Duke seemed much affected by the hard case of the King's officer , 
but he replied that the state of the country must come first , and it was
absolutely necessary that Rob Roy should die . He held to this resolution
even when Galbraith of Garschattachin and others of his followers seemed
inclined to put in a good word for Rob . He was about to examine the
prisoner further , when a Highlander brought him a letter which seemed to
cause the great man much annoyance . It announced that the Highland
clans , on whom the Lowlanders had been relying , had made a separate
peace with the enemy and had gone home . 

As the night was now fast coming on , the Duke ordered Garschattachin to
draw off his party in one direction , while he himself would escort the
prisoner to a place called Duchray . 

"Here's auld ordering and counter-ordering , " growled Garschattachin
between his teeth , "but bide a wee--we may , ere long , play at Change
Seats--for the King's coming ! "

The two divisions of cavalry began to move down the valley at a slow
trot . One party , that commanded by Galbraith , turned to the right , where
they were to spend the night in an old castle , while the other , taking
along with them Frank Osbaldistone , escorted the prisoner to a place of
safety . Rob Roy was mounted behind one of the strongest men present , one
Ewan of Brigglands , to whom he was fastened by a horse-belt passed round
both and buckled before the yeoman's breast . Frank was set on a
troop-horse and placed immediately behind . They were as closely
surrounded by soldiers as the road would permit , and there were always
one or two troopers , pistol in hand , riding on either side of Rob Roy . 

Nevertheless the dauntless outlaw was endeavouring all the time to
persuade Ewan of Brigglands to give him a last chance for his life . 

"Your father , Ewan , " he said , so low that Frank had difficulty in
catching the words , "would not thus have carried an old friend to the
shambles , like a calf , for all the dukes in Christendom ! "

To this Ewan returned no answer--only shrugging his shoulders as a sign
that what he was doing was by no choice of his own . 

"And when the Mac-Gregors come down the glen , " the voice of the tempter
went on in Ewan's ear , "and ye see empty folds , a bloody hearthstone , 
and the fire flashing out between the rafters of your house , ye may be
thinking then , Ewan , that were your friend Rob Roy to the fore , you
might have had that safe , which it will make your heart sore to lose ! "

They were at this time halted on the river-bank , waiting for the signal
to bring over the Mac-Gregor . Rob made one last attempt . 

"It's a sore thing , " said Rob Roy , still closer in the ear of his
conductor , "that Ewan of Brigglands , whom Rob Roy has helped with hand , 
sword , and purse , should mind a gloom from a great man more than a
friend's life . "

Ewan , sorely agitated , was silent . 

Then came the Duke's loud call from the opposite bank , "Bring over the
prisoner ! "

Dashing forward precipitately , Ewan's horse , with the two men on his
back , entered the water . A soldier kept back Frank from following . But
in the waning light he could see the Duke getting his people into order
across the river , when suddenly a splash and a cry warned him that Rob
had prevailed on Ewan of Brigglands to give him one more chance for
life . 


II . THE ESCAPE

In a moment all was confusion . The Duke shouted and ordered . Men rode
hither and thither in the fast-falling darkness , some really anxious to
earn the hundred guineas which the Duke promised to the captor of his
foe , but the most part trying rather by shouting and confusion to cover
Rob's escape . At one time , indeed , he was hardly pressed , several shots
coming very near him before he could lose himself in the darkness . He
was compelled to come to the surface to breathe , but in some way he
contrived to loosen his plaid , which , floating down the stream , took off
the attention of his more inveterate pursuers while he himself swam into
safety . 

In the confusion Frank had been left alone upon the bank , and there he
remained till he heard the baffled troopers returning , some with vows of
vengeance upon himself . 

"Where is the English stranger ? " called one; "it was he who gave Rob the
knife to cut the belt ! "

"Cleave the pock-pudding to the chafts ! " said another . 

"Put a brace of balls into his brain-pan ! " suggested yet another . 

"Or three inches of cold iron into his briskit ! "

So , in order to nullify these various amiable intentions , Frank
Osbaldistone leaped from his horse , and plunged into a thicket of alder
trees , where he was almost instantly safe from pursuit . It was now
altogether dark , and , having nowhere else to go , Frank resolved to
retrace his way back to the little inn at which he had passed the
previous night . The moon rose ere he had proceeded very far , bringing
with it a sharp frosty wind which made Frank glad to be moving rapidly
over the heather . He was whistling , lost in thought , when two riders
came behind him , ranging up silently on either side . The man on the
right of Frank addressed him in an English tongue and accent strange
enough to hear in these wilds . 

"So ho , friend , whither so late ? "

"To my supper and bed at Aberfoil ! " replied Frank , curtly . 

"Are the passes open ? " the horseman went on , in the same commanding tone
of voice . 

"I do not know , " said Frank; "but if you are an English stranger , I
advise you to turn back till daybreak . There has been a skirmish , and
the neighbourhood is not perfectly safe for travellers . "

"The soldiers had the worst of it , had they not ? "

"They had , indeed--an officer's party was destroyed or made prisoners . "

"Are you sure of that ? " persisted the man on horseback . 

"I was an unwilling spectator of the battle ! " said Frank . 

"Unwilling ! Were not you engaged in it ? "

"Certainly not , " he answered , a little nettled at the man's tone . "I was
held a prisoner by the King's officer ! "

"On what suspicion ? And who and what are you ? "

"I really do not know , sir , " said Frank , growing quickly angry , "why I
should answer so many questions put to me by a stranger . I ask you no
questions as to your business here , and you will oblige me by making no
inquiries as to mine . "

But a new voice struck in , in tones which made every nerve in the young
man's body tingle . 

"Mr . Francis Osbaldistone , " it said , "should not whistle his favourite
airs when he wishes to remain undiscovered . "

And Diana Vernon , for it was she , wrapped in a horseman's cloak , 
whistled in playful mimicry the second part of the tune , which had been
on Frank's lips as they came up with him . 

"Great heavens , can it be you , Miss Vernon , " cried Frank , when at last
he found words , "in such a spot--at such an hour--in such a lawless
country ! "

While Frank was speaking , he was trying to gain a glimpse of her
companion . The man was certainly not Rashleigh . For so much he was
thankful , at least , nor could the stranger's courteous address proceed
from any of the other Osbaldistone brothers . There was in it too much
good breeding and knowledge of the world for that . But there was also
something of impatience in the attitude of Diana's companion , which was
not long in manifesting itself . 

"Diana , " he said , "give your cousin his property , and let us not spend
time here . "

Whereupon Miss Vernon took out a small case , and with a deeper and
graver tone of feeling she said , "Dear cousin , you see I was born to be
your better angel . Rashleigh has been compelled to give up his spoil , 
and had we reached Aberfoil last night , I would have found some
messenger to give you these . But now I have to do the errand myself . "

"Diana , " said the horseman , "the evening grows late , and we are yet far
from our home . "

"Pray consider , sir , " she said , lightly answering him , "how recently I
have been under control . Besides , I have not yet given my cousin his
packet--or bidden him farewell--farewell forever ! Yes , Frank , forever . 
 ( She added the last words in a lower tone . ) There is a gulf fixed
between us ! Where I go , you must not follow--what we do , you must not
share in--farewell--be happy ! "

In the attitude in which she bent from her Highland pony , the girl's
face , perhaps not altogether unintentionally , touched that of Frank
Osbaldistone . She pressed his hand , and a tear that had gathered on Die
Vernon's eyelash found its way to the young man's cheek . 


That was all . It was but a moment , yet Frank Osbaldistone never forgot
that moment . He stood dumb and amazed with the recovered treasure in his
hand , mechanically counting the sparkles which flew from the horses'
hoofs which carried away his lost Diana and her unknown companion . 

 * * * * *

Frank was still dreaming over his almost unbelievable encounter with
Miss Vernon--more concerned perhaps , be it said , about the fact that she
had wept to part with him than about the recovery of his father's
papers , when another traveller overtook him , this time on foot . 

"A braw nicht , Mr . Osbaldistone , " said a voice which there was no
mistaking for that of the Mac-Gregor himself; "we have met at the mirk
hour before now , I am thinking ! "

Frank congratulated the Chieftain heartily on his recent wonderful
escape from peril . 

"Ay , " said Rob Roy , coolly , "there is as much between the throat and the
halter as between the cup and the lip . But tell me the news ! "


He laughed heartily at the exploits of the Bailie and the red-hot
coulter in the inn of Aberfoil , and at the apprehension of Frank and his
companion by the King's officer . 

"As man lives by bread , " he cried , "the buzzards have mistaken my friend
the Bailie for his Excellency , and you for Diana Vernon--oh , the most
egregious night owlets ! "

"Miss Vernon , " said Frank , trying to gain what information he could , 
"does she still bear that name ? "

But the wary Highlander easily evaded him . 

"Ay , ay , " he said , "she's under lawful authority now; and it's time , for
she's a daft hempie . It's a pity that his Excellency is a thought
elderly for her . The like of you or my son Hamish would have sorted
better in point of years . "

This blow , which destroyed all Frank's hopes , quite silenced him--so
much so that Rob Roy had to ask if he were ill or wearied with the long
day's work , being , as he said , "doubtless unused to such things . "

But in order to divert his attention Mac-Gregor asked him as to the
skirmish , and what had happened afterwards . It was with genuine agony
that Rob Roy listened to the tale which Frank had to tell--though he
modified , as far as he could , the treatment the Bailie and himself had
met with from the Mac-Gregors . 

"And the excise collector , " said Rob Roy; "I wish he may not have been
at the bottom of the ploy himself ! I thought he looked very queer when I
told him that he must remain as a hostage for my safe return . I wager he
will not get off without ransom ! "

"Morris , " said Frank , with great solemnity , "has paid the last great
ransom of all ! "

"Eh--what ? " cried the Mac-Gregor , "what d'ye say ? I trust it was in the
skirmish that he was killed ? "

"He was slain in cold blood , after the fight was over , Mr . Campbell ! "

"Cold blood ! " he muttered rapidly between his teeth , "how fell this ? 
Speak out , man , and do not Mister or Campbell me--my foot is on my
native heath , and my name is Mac-Gregor ! "

Without noticing the rudeness of his tone , Frank gave him a distinct
account of the death of Morris . Rob Roy struck the butt of his gun with
great vehemence on the ground , and broke out , "I vow to God , such a deed
might make one forswear kin , clan , country , wife , and bairns ! And yet
the villain wrought long for it . He but drees the doom he intended for
me . Hanging or drowning--it is just the same . But I wish , for all that , 
they had put a ball or a dirk through the traitor's breast . It will
cause talk--the fashion of his death--though all the world knows that
Helen Mac-Gregor has deep wrongs to avenge . "

Whereupon he quitted the subject altogether , and spoke of Frank
Osbaldistone's affairs . He was glad to hear that he had received the
stolen papers from Diana Vernon's own hands . 

"I was sure you would get them , " he said; "the letter you brought me
contained his Excellency's pleasure to that effect , and it was for that
purpose I asked ye to come up the glen in order that I might serve you . 
But his Excellency has come across Rashleigh first . "

Rob Roy's words made much clear to the young man , yet some things
remained mysterious . He remembered that Diana Vernon had left the
library and immediately returned with the letter which was afterwards
claimed by Rob Roy in the tolbooth of Glasgow . The person whom he now
called his Excellency must therefore have been in Osbaldistone Hall at
the same time as himself , and unknown to all except Diana and possibly
to her cousin Rashleigh . Frank remembered the double shadows on the
windows , and thought that he could now see the reason of those . 

But Rob would give him no clew as to who or what his Excellency was . 

"I am thinking , " he said cautiously , "that if you do not know that
already , it cannot be of much consequence for you to know at all . So I
will e'en pass over that part of it . But this I will tell you . His
Excellency was hidden by Diana Vernon in her own apartment at the Hall , 
as best reason was , all the time you were there . Only Sir Hildebrand and
Rashleigh knew of it . You , of course , were out of the question , and as
for the young squires , they had not enough wit among the five of them to
call the cat from the cream ! "

The two travellers , thus talking together , had approached within a
quarter of a mile from the village , when an outpost of Highlanders , 
springing upon them , bade them stand and tell their business . The single
word _Gregarach_ , pronounced in the deep commanding tones of Frank's
companion , sufficed to call forth an answering yell of joyous
recognition . The men threw themselves down before the escaped Chief , 
clasping his knees , and , as it were , worshipping him with eyes and lips , 
much as poor Dougal had done in the Glasgow tolbooth . 

The very hills resounded with the triumph . Old and young , both sexes and
all ages , came running forth with shouts of jubilation , till it seemed
as if a mountain torrent was hurrying to meet the travellers . Rob Roy
took Frank by the hand , and he did not allow any to come near him till
he had given them to understand that his companion was to be well and
carefully treated . 

So literally was this command acted upon , that for the time being Frank
was not even allowed the use of his limbs . He was carried--will he , nill
he--in triumph toward the inn of Mrs . MacAlpine . It was in Frank's heart
that he might possibly meet there with Diana Vernon , but when he entered
and looked around , the only known face in the smoky hovel was that of
the Bailie , who , with a sort of reserved dignity , received the greetings
of Rob Roy , his apologies for the indifferent accommodation which he
could give him , and his well-meant inquiries after his health . 

"I am well , kinsman , " said the Bailie , "one cannot expect to carry the
Salt Market of Glasgow at one's tail , as a snail does his shell . But I
am blithe to see that ye have gotten out of the hands of your
unfriends ! "

The Bailie , however , cheered by Highland refreshment , presently unbent
and had many things to say . He would also have spoken concerning Helen
Mac-Gregor . But Rob stopped him . 

"Say nothing of my wife , " he said sternly; "of me , ye are welcome to
speak your full pleasure . "

Next the Bailie offered to bind Rob's two sons as apprentices to the
weaving trade , which well-meant proposition produced from the outlaw the
characteristic anathema , mostly ( and happily ) conceived in Gaelic , 
"_Ceade millia diaoul ! _ My sons weavers ! _Millia molligheart ! _ But I
would rather see every loom in Glasgow , beam , traddles , and shuttles , 
burnt in the deil's ain fire sooner ! "

However Rob Roy honestly paid the Bailie his thousand merks , principal
and interest , in good French gold . And Frank quite won the outlaw's
heart by the suggestion that the foreign influence of the house of
Osbaldistone and Tresham could easily push the fortune of Hamish and
Robin in the service of the King of France or in that of his Majesty of
Spain . Rob could not for the present accept , he said . There was other
work to be done at home . But all the same he thanked him for the offer , 
with , as it seemed , some considerable emotion . Already Frank was
learning the truth that a hard man is always more moved by what one may
do for his children , than with what one does for himself . 

Lastly he sent "the Dougal cratur , " dressed in Andrew Fairservice's
ancient garments , to see them safe upon their way . He had a boat in
waiting for them on Loch Lomond side , and there on the pebbles the
Bailie and his cousin bade each other farewell . They parted with much
mutual regard , and even affection--the Bailie at the last saying to Rob
Roy that if ever he was in need of a hundred "or even twa hundred pounds
sterling , " he had only to send a line to the Salt Market . While the
chief answered that if ever anybody should affront his kinsman , the
Bailie had only to let him ken , and he would pull the ears out of his
head if he were the best man in Glasgow ! 

With these assurances of high mutual consideration , the boat bore away
for the southwest angle of the lake . Rob Roy was left alone on the
shore , conspicuous by his long gun , waving tartans , and the single tall
feather in his bonnet which denoted the chieftain . 

The travellers arrived safely in Glasgow , when the Bailie went instantly
home , vowing aloud that since he had once more gotten within sight of
St . Mungo's steeple , it would be a long day and a short one before he
ventured out of eye-shot of it again . 

As for Frank , he made his way to his lodgings in order to seek out Owen . 
The door was opened by Andrew Fairservice , who set up a joyous shout , 
and promptly ushered the young man into the presence of the Head Clerk . 
But Mr . Owen was not alone . Mr . Osbaldistone the elder was there also , 
and in another moment Frank was folded in his father's arms . 


III . THE DEATH OF RASHLEIGH

 * * * * *

Mr . Osbaldistone's first impulse seemed to be to preserve his dignity . 
But nature was too strong for him . 

"My son--my dear son ! " he murmured . 

The head of the firm of Osbaldistone and Tresham had returned from
Holland sooner than was expected , and with the resources which he had
gathered there , and being now in full credit , he had no difficulty in
solving the financial problems which had weighed so heavily upon the
house in his absence . He refused , however , every tender of apology from
MacVittie and Company , settled the balance of their account , and
announced to them that that page of their ledger , with all the
advantages connected with it , was closed to them forever . 

Soon after the home-coming of Frank Osbaldistone from the Highlands and
his reconciliation with his father , the great Jacobite rebellion of 1715
broke out , in which the greater part of the Highlands burst into a
flame , as well as much of the more northerly parts of England . Sir
Hildebrand led out his sons to battle--all , that is to say , with the
exception of Rashleigh , who had changed his politics and become a spy on
behalf of the government of King George . 

But it was not the will of Fate that the name of Osbaldistone should
make any figure in that short and inglorious campaign . Thorncliff was
killed in a duel with one of his brother officers . The sot Percie died
shortly after , according to the manner of his kind . Dickon broke his
neck in spurring a blood mare beyond her paces . Wilfred the fool died
fighting at Proud Preston on the day of the Barricades; and his
gallantry was no less that he could never remember an hour together for
which king he was doing battle . 

John also behaved boldly and died of his wounds a few days after in the
prison of Newgate , to the despair of old Sir Hildebrand , who did not
long survive him . Indeed he willingly laid himself down to die , after
having first disinherited Rashleigh as a traitor , and left his much
encumbered estates to his nephew , Frank Osbaldistone . 

Mr . Osbaldistone the elder now took an unexpected view of his son's
prospects . He had cared nothing for his family in the past--indeed , 
never since he had been expelled from Osbaldistone Hall to make way for
his younger brother . But now he willingly spent his money in taking up
the mortgages upon the Osbaldistone estates , and he urged upon Frank the
necessity of going down at once to the Hall , lest Rashleigh should get
before him in that possession which is nine points of the law . 

So to Osbaldistone Hall went Frank once more , his heart not a little
sore within him for the good days he had spent in it , and especially
because of the thought that he would now find there no madcap Die
Vernon to tease and torment him out of his life . 

First of all , to make his title clear , Frank had been desired to visit
the hospitable house of old Justice Inglewood , with whom Sir Hildebrand
had deposited his will . As it chanced , it was in that good gentleman's
power to give the young man some information which interested him more
than the right of possession to many Osbaldistone Halls . 

After dinner in the evening Frank and the Justice were sitting together , 
when all of a sudden Squire Inglewood called upon his companion to
pledge a bumper to "dear Die Vernon , the rose of the wilderness , the
heath-bell of Cheviot , that blossom transported to an infamous convent ! "

"Is not Miss Vernon , then , married ? " cried Frank , in great astonishment , 
"I thought his Excellency--"

"Pooh--pooh ! His Excellency and his Lordship are all a humbug now , you
know , " said the Justice; "mere St . Germains titles--Earl of Beauchamp
and ambassador plenipotentiary from France , when the Duke Regent scarce
knew that he lived , I daresay . But you must have seen old Sir Frederick
Vernon at the hall , when he played the part of Father Vaughan ? "

"Good Heavens , " cried Frank , "then Father Vaughan was Miss Vernon's
father ? "

"To be sure he was , " said the Justice , coolly; "there's no use keeping
the secret now , for he must be out of the country by this
time--otherwise no doubt it would be my duty to apprehend him . Come , off
with your bumper to my dear lost Die ! "

So Frank fared forth to Osbaldistone Hall , uncertain whether to be glad
or sorry at Squire Inglewood's news . Finally he decided to be glad--or
at least as glad as he could . For Diana , though equally lost to him , was
at least not wedded to any one else . 

Syddall , the old butler of Sir Hildebrand , seemed at first very
unwilling to admit them , but Frank's persistence , together with Andrew
Fairservice's insolence , made a way into the melancholy house . Frank
ordered a fire to be lighted in the library . Syddall tried to persuade
him to take up his quarters elsewhere , on the plea that the library had
not been sat in for a long time , and that the chimney smoked . 

To the old man's confusion , however , when they entered the room , a fire
was blazing in the grate . He took up the tongs to hide his confusion , 
muttering , "It is burning clear now , but it smoked woundily in the
morning ! "

Next Frank ordered Andrew to procure him two stout fellows of the
neighbourhood on whom he could rely , who would back the new proprietor , 
in case of Rashleigh attempting any attack during Frank's stay in the
home of his fathers . 

Andrew soon returned with a couple of his friends--or , as he described
them , "sober , decent men , weel founded in doctrinal points , and , above
all , as bold as lions . "

Syddall , however , shook his head at sight of them . 

"I maybe cannot expect that your Honour should put confidence in what I
say , but it is Heaven's truth for all that . Ambrose Wingfield is as
honest a man as lives , but if there be a false knave in all the country , 
it is his brother Lancie . The whole country knows him to be a spy for
Clerk Jobson on the poor gentlemen that have been in trouble . But he's a
dissenter , and I suppose that's enough nowadays . "

The evening darkened down , and trimming the wood fire in the old library
Frank sat on , dreaming dreams in which a certain lady occupied a great
place . He chanced to lift his eyes at a sound which seemed like a sigh , 
and lo ! Diana Vernon stood before him . She was resting on the arm of a
figure so like the portrait on the wall that involuntarily Frank raised
his eyes to the frame to see whether it was not indeed empty . 

But the figures were neither painted canvas nor yet such stuff as dreams
are made of . Diana Vernon and her father--for it was they--stood before
the young man in actual flesh and blood . Frank was so astonished that
for a while he could not speak , and it was Sir Frederick who first broke
the silence . 

"We are your suppliants , Mr . Osbaldistone , " he said; "we claim the
refuge and protection of your roof , till we can pursue a journey where
dungeons and death gape for me at every step ! "

"Surely you cannot suppose--" Frank found words with great
difficulty--"Miss Vernon cannot suppose that I am so ungrateful--that I
could betray any one--much less you ! "

"I know it , " said Sir Frederick , "though I am conferring on you a
confidence which I would have been glad to have imposed on any one else . 
But my fate , which has chased me through a life of perils , is now
pressing me hard , and , indeed , leaving me no alternative . "

At this moment the door opened , and the voice of Andrew Fairservice was
heard without . "I am bringing in the candles--ye can light them when ye
like--'can do' is easy carried about with one ! "

Frank had just time to rush to the door and thrust the officious rascal
out , shutting the door upon him . Then , remembering the length of his
servant's tongue , he made haste to follow him to the hall to prevent his
gabbling of what he might have seen . Andrew's voice was loud as Frank
opened the door . 

"What is the matter with you , you fool ? " he demanded; "you stare and
look wild as if you had seen a ghost . "

"No--no--nothing , " stammered Andrew , "only your Honour was pleased to be
hasty ! "

Frank Osbaldistone immediately dismissed the two men whom Andrew had
found for him , giving them a crown-piece to drink his health , and they
withdrew , apparently contented and unsuspicious . They certainly could
have no further talk with Andrew that night , and it did not seem
possible that in the few moments which Andrew had spent in the kitchen
before Frank's arrival , he could have had time to utter two words . 

But sometimes only two words can do a great deal of harm . On this
occasion they cost two lives . 

"You now know my secret , " said Diana Vernon; "you know how near and dear
is the relative who has so long found shelter here . And it will not
surprise you , that , knowing such a secret , Rashleigh should rule me with
a rod of iron . "

But in spite of all that had happened , Sir Frederick was a strict and
narrow Catholic , and Frank found him more than ever determined to
sacrifice his daughter to the life of the convent . 

"She has endured trials , " he said , "trials which might have dignified
the history of a martyr . She has spent the day in darkness and the night
in vigil , and never breathed a syllable of weakness or complaint . In a
word , Mr . Osbaldistone , she is a worthy offering to that God to whom I
dedicate her , as all that is left dear or precious to Frederick Vernon ! "

Frank felt stunned and bewildered when at last they retired . But he had
sufficient forethought to order a bed to be made up for him in the
library , and dismissed Syddall and Andrew with orders not to disturb him
till seven o'clock in the morning . 

That night Frank lay long awake , and was at last dropping over to sleep
when he was brought back to consciousness by a tremendous noise at the
front door of Osbaldistone Hall . He hastened downstairs only in time to
hear Andrew Fairservice bidding Syddall stand aside . 

"We hae naething to fear if they come in King George's name , " he was
saying; "we hae spent baith bluid and gold for him . "

In an agony of terror Frank could hear bolt after bolt withdrawn by the
officious scoundrel , who continued to boast all the while of his
master's loyalty to King George . He flew instantly to Diana's room . She
was up and dressed . 

"We are familiar with danger , " she said with a sad smile . "I have the
key of the little garden door . We will escape by it . Only keep them a
few moments in play ! And dear , dear Frank , again--for the last time , 
farewell ! "

By this time the men were on the stairway , and presently rapping on the
library door . 

"You robber dogs ! " cried Frank , wilfully misunderstanding their purpose;
"if you do not instantly quit the house , I will fire a blunderbuss upon
you through the door ! "

"Fire a fool's bauble , " returned Andrew Fairservice; "it's Clerk Jobson
with a legal warrant--"

"To search for , take , and apprehend , " said the voice of that abominable
pettifogger , "the bodies of certain persons in my warrant named , charged
of high treason under the 13th of King William , chapter third . "

The violence on the door was renewed . 

"I am rising , gentlemen , " said Frank , trying to gain as much time as
possible; "commit no violence--give me leave to look at your warrant , 
and if it is formal and legal , I shall not oppose it . "

"God save great George our King , " cried Andrew Fairservice , "I telled ye
that ye would find no Jacobites here ! "

At last the door had to be opened , when Clerk Jobson and several
assistants entered . The lawyer showed a warrant for the arrest of Diana
Vernon , her father , --and , to his surprise , of Frank himself . 

Clerk Jobson , evidently well-informed , went directly to Diana's chamber . 

"The hare has stolen away , " he said brutally , "but her form is still
warm . The greyhounds will have her by the haunches yet . "

A scream from the garden announced that he had prophesied too truly . In
five minutes more Rashleigh entered the library with Diana and her
father , Sir Frederick , as his prisoners . 

"The fox , " he said , "knew his old earth , but he forgot it could be
stopped by a careful huntsman . I had not forgot the garden gate , Sir
Frederick--or , if the title suits you better , my most noble Lord
Beauchamp ! "

"Rashleigh , " said Sir Frederick , "thou art a most detestable villain ! "

"I better deserved the name , my Lord , " said Rashleigh , turning his eyes
piously upward , "when under an able tutor I sought to introduce civil
war into a peaceful country . But I have since done my best to atone for
my errors . "

Frank Osbaldistone could hold out no longer . 

"If there is one thing on earth more hideous than another , " he cried , 
"it is villainy masked by hypocrisy ! "

"Ha , my gentle cousin , " said Rashleigh , holding a candle toward Frank
and surveying him from head to foot , "right welcome to Osbaldistone
Hall . I can forgive your spleen . It is hard to lose an estate and a
sweetheart in one night . For now we must take possession of this poor
manor-house in the name of the lawful heir , Sir Rashleigh Osbaldistone ! "

But though Rashleigh braved it out thus , he was clearly far from
comfortable , and especially did he wince when Diana told him that what
he had now done had been the work of an hour , but that it would furnish
him with reflections for a lifetime . 

"And of what nature these will be , " she added , "I leave to your own
conscience , which will not slumber forever ! "

So presently the three prisoners were carried off . Syddall and Andrew
were ordered to be turned out of the house , the latter complaining
bitterly . 

"I only said that surely my master was speaking to a ghost in the
library--and that villain Lancie--thus to betray an auld friend that has
sung aff the same Psalm-book wi' him for twenty years ! "

However , Andrew had just got clear of the avenue when he fell among a
drove of Highland cattle , the drivers of which questioned him tightly as
to what had happened at the Hall . They then talked in whispers among
themselves till the lumbering sound of a coach was heard coming down the
road from the house . The Highlanders listened attentively . The escort
consisted of Rashleigh and several peace-officers . 

So soon as the carriage had passed the avenue gate , it was shut behind
the cavalcade by a Highlandman , stationed there for the purpose . At the
same time the carriage was impeded in its further progress by some
felled trees which had been dragged across the road . The cattle also got
in the way of the horses , and the escort began to drive them off with
their whips . 

"Who dares abuse our cattle , " said a rough voice; "shoot him down , 
Angus ! "

"A rescue--a rescue ! " shouted Rashleigh , instantly comprehending what
had taken place , and , firing a pistol , he wounded the man who had
spoken . 

"_Claymore ! _" cried the leader of the Highlanders , and an affray
instantly engaged . The officers of the law , unused to such prompt
bloodshed , offered little real resistance . They galloped off in
different directions as fast as their beasts would carry them . 
Rashleigh , however , who had been dismounted , maintained on foot a
desperate and single-handed conflict with the leader of the band . At
last he dropped . 

"Will you ask forgiveness for the sake of God , King James , and auld
friendship ? " demanded a voice which Frank knew well . 

"No , never ! " cried Rashleigh , fiercely . 

"Then , traitor , die in your treason ! " retorted Mac-Gregor , and plunged
his sword into the prostrate antagonist . 

Rob Roy then drew out the attorney Clerk Jobson from the carriage , more
dead than alive , and threw him under the wheel . 

"Mr . Osbaldistone , " he said in Frank's ear , "you have nothing to fear . 
Your friends will soon be in safety . Farewell , and forget not the
Mac-Gregor ! "

 * * * * *

 "_And that_ , " I said , "_is all ! _"

 But I was instantly overwhelmed by the rush of a
 living wave . 

 "No , no , " cried the children , throwing themselves
 upon me , "you must tell us what became of Rob
 Roy--of the Bailie--of Dougal ! "

 These demands came from the boys . 

 "And if Diana married Frank , or went to the
 convent ? " interjected Sweetheart . 

 "Well , " I said , "I can soon answer all these
 questions . Sir Frederick died soon after , but
 before his end he relieved his daughter from her
 promise to enter a convent . She married Mr . Frank
 Osbaldistone instead . "

 "And lived happy ever after ? " added Maid Margaret , 
 who was at the "fairy princess" stage of
 literature . 

 "Except when she got cross with him , " commented Sir
 Toady , an uncompromising realist , with pessimistic
 views on womenkind . 

 "And Rob Roy held his ground among his native
 mountains until he died . "

 "Tell us about the Bailie , " said Hugh John; "I
 liked the Bailie--he's jolly ! "

 I told him that he was far from being alone in that
 opinion . 

 "The Bailie , " I answered , "lived , as the Maid says , 
 happily ever after , having very wisely married his
 servant Mattie . He carried on all the northern
 affairs of Osbaldistone and Tresham , now a greater
 commercial house than ever , and lived to be Lord
 Provost of the city of Glasgow . "

 "Let Glasgow flourish ! " cried Sir Toady , 
 spontaneously . And the audience concluded the
 fourth tale and last from _Rob Roy_ with a very
 passable imitation of a Highland yell . 
