I . THE EARL'S SECRET

ON the seashore not far from the mansion-house of Monkbarns stood the
little fisherman's cottage of Saunders Mucklebackit . Saunders it was who
had rigged the mast , by which Sir Arthur and his daughter were pulled to
the top of the cliffs on the night of the storm . His wife came every day
to the door of Monkbarns to sell fish to Miss Griselda , the Antiquary's
sister , when the pair of them would stand by the hour "skirling and
flyting beneath his window like so many seamaws , " as Oldbuck himself
said . 

Besides Steenie Mucklebackit , the eldest son , the same who had assisted
Edie Ochiltree to bestow a well-deserved chastisement upon
Dousterswivel , and a number of merry half-naked urchins , the family
included the grandmother , Elspeth Mucklebackit--a woman old , but not
infirm , whose understanding appeared at most times to be asleep , but the
stony terror of whose countenance often frightened the bairns more than
their mother's shrill tongue and ready palm . 

Elspeth seldom spoke . Indeed , she had done little for many years except
twirl the distaff in her corner by the fire . Few cared to have much to
do with her . She was thought to be "far from canny , " and certainly she
knew more about the great family of Glenallan than it was safe to speak
aloud . 

It chanced on the very night when Edie and Steenie had given a skinful
of sore bones to the German impostor Dousterswivel , that the Countess of
Glenallan , mother of the Earl , was brought to be buried at midnight
among the ruins of St . Ruth . 

Such had been the custom of the family from ancient times--indeed , ever
since the Great Earl fell fighting at the Red Harlaw against Donald of
the Isles . More recently there had been another reason for such a
strange fashion of burial . For the family were Catholics , and there had
long been laws in Scotland against the holding of popish ceremonials
even on an occasion so solemn . 

The news of the death of her ancient mistress , coming at last to the
ears of old Elspeth , took such hold upon her , that she could not rest
till she had sent off Edie Ochiltree to the Earl of Glenallan , at
Glenallan House , with a ring for a token and the message that Elspeth of
the Craigburnfoot must see him before she died . She had , Edie was to
say , a secret on her soul , without revealing which she could not hope to
die in peace . 

Accordingly Edie set off for the castle of Glenallan , taking the ring
with him , but with very little hope of finding his way into the Earl's
presence; for Lord Glenallan had been long completely withdrawn from the
world . His mother was Countess in her own right , and so long as she
lived , her son had been wholly dependent upon her . In addition to which
some great sorrow or some great crime , the countryside was not sure
which , pressed sore upon his mind , and being a strict Catholic he passed
his time in penance and prayer . 

However , by the help of an old soldier , one Francie Macraw , who had been
his rear-rank man at Fontenoy , Edie Ochiltree was able after many delays
to win a way to the Earl's presence--though the priests who were about
his person evidently tried to keep everything connected with the outer
world from his knowledge . The Earl , a tall , haggard , gloomy man , whose
age seemed twice what it really was , stood holding the token ring in his
hand . At first he took Edie for a father of his own church , and demanded
if any further penance were necessary to atone for his sin . But as soon
as Edie declared his message , at the very first mention of the name of
Elspeth of the Craigburnfoot , the Earl's cheek became even more
deathlike than it had been at Edie's entrance . 

"Ah , " he said , "that name is indeed written on the darkest page of a
terrible history . But what can the woman want with me ? Is she dead or
living ? "

"She is living in the body , " said Edie , "and at times her mind lives
too--but she is an awfu' woman . "

"She always was so , " said the Earl , answering almost unconsciously . "She
was different from other women--likest , perhaps , to her who is no
more--"

Edie knew that he meant his own mother , so lately dead . 

"She wishes to see me , " continued the Earl; "she shall be gratified , 
though the meeting will be a pleasure to neither of us . "

Lord Glenallan gave Edie a handful of guineas , which , contrary to his
usage , Edie had not the courage to refuse . The Earl's tone was too
absolute . 

Then , as an intimation that the interview was at an end , Lord Glenallan
called his servant . 

"See this old man safe , " he said; "let no one ask him any questions . And
you , my friend , be gone , and forget the road that leads to my house ! "

"That would indeed be difficult , " said the undaunted Edie , "since your
lordship has given me such good cause to remember it . "

Lord Glenallan stared , as if hardly comprehending the old man's boldness
in daring to bandy words with him . Then , without answering , he made him
another signal to depart by a simple movement of his hand , which Edie , 
awed far beyond his wont , instantly obeyed . 


II . THE MOTHER'S VENGEANCE

The day of Lord Glenallan's visit to the cottage where dwelt old Elspeth
of the Craigburnfoot seemed at first ill timed . That very day Steenie
Mucklebackit , the young , the gallant , the handsome eldest son of the
house had been carried to his grave . He had been drowned while at the
fishing , though his father had risked his life in vain to save him . The
family had now returned home , and were sitting alone in the first
benumbing shock of their grief . 

It was some time before the Earl could make good his entrance into the
cottage . It was still longer before he could convince the old woman
Elspeth that he was really Lord Glenallan , and so obtain an opportunity
of speaking with her . But at last they were left alone in the cottage , 
and the thick veil which had fallen upon Elspeth's spirit seemed for a
while to be drawn aside . She spoke like one of an education far superior
to her position , clearly and calmly , even when recounting the most
terrible events . 

Her very first words recalled to the Earl the fair young wife , whom he
had married long ago , against his mother's will and without her
knowledge . 

"Name not her name , " he cried , in agony , "all that is dead to me--dead
long ago ! "

"I MUST ! " said the old woman; "it is of her I have to speak . "

And in the fewest and simplest words she told him how , when his mother
the Countess had found means to separate husband and wife , while he
himself was fleeing half mad , none knew whither , the young wife had
thrown herself in a fit of frenzy over the cliffs into the sea . It was
to Elspeth's cottage that she and her babe had been brought . 

"And here , " said the terrible old woman , suddenly thrusting a golden
bodkin into his hand , "is the very dagger which your mother the Countess
gave me in order that with it I might slay your infant son . "

The Earl looked at the gold bodkin or dagger , as if in fancy he saw the
blood of his child still red upon it . 

"Wretch ! " he cried; "and had you the heart ? "

"I kenna whether I would or not , " said Elspeth . "My mistress commanded
and I obeyed . So did I ever . But my obedience was not to be tried that
time . For when I returned , the babe had gone . Your younger brother had
been called up to the castle . The child had been left in the care of the
Countess's Spanish maid , and when I returned to my cottage , both she and
the babe were gone . The dead body of your young wife alone remained . And
now , " concluded Elspeth , abruptly , "can you forgive me ? "

Lord Glenallan was going out of the hut , overwhelmed by the disclosure
to which he had been listening . He saw his young wife hounded to death
by his fierce and revengeful mother . He thought of the living child so
wonderfully left to him as a legacy from the dead . Yet he turned at
Elspeth's last words . 

"May God forgive thee , miserable woman , " he said . "Turn for mercy to
Him . He will forgive you as sincerely as I do . "

As Lord Glenallan went out into the sunlight , he met face to face with
the Antiquary himself , who was on his way to the cottage to offer what
consolation or help might be in his power . The Earl and he recognised
one another , but the Antiquary's greeting was hard and cold . As a
magistrate he had made , on his own responsibility and against all the
power of the Glenallan family , the legal inquiries into the death of the
Earl's young wife . Indeed , during a residence which she had made at
Knockwinnock Castle with the Wardour family twenty years ago , and while
she was still only known as Miss Eveline Neville , the Antiquary had
loved her and had asked her to be his wife . It was , indeed , chiefly on
her account that he had never married . Mr . Oldbuck had never ceased to
mourn her , and now , believing as he had good reason to do , that the Earl
was the cause of her untimely death , and of the stigma which rested upon
her name , it was little wonder that he should wish to have no dealings
with him . 

But the Earl had a great need in his heart to speak to some one . In a
moment the whole world seemed to have changed for him . For the first
time he knew the truth about a dark deed of cruelty . For the first time , 
also , he knew that he had a son . He desired above all else the wise
counsel of a true friend . In his heart he had admired the fearlessness
of the Antiquary in the bold inquiry he had made at the time of Eveline
Neville's death , and now , refusing to be rebuffed , he followed Mr . 
Oldbuck as he was turning away , and demanded that he should not deny him
his counsel and assistance at a most terrible and critical moment . 

It was not in the good Antiquary's nature to refuse such a request from
Earl or beggar , and their interview ended in the Earl's accepting the
hospitality of Monkbarns for the night , in order that they might have
plenty of time to discuss the whole subject of Elspeth's communication . 

On his own part Mr . Oldbuck had some comfort to give Lord Glenallan . He
had kept the papers which concerned the inquiry carefully , and he was
able to assure his lordship that his brother had carried off the babe
with him , probably for the purpose of having it brought up and educated
upon the English estates he had inherited from his father , and on which
he had ever afterward lived . 

"My brother , " said Lord Glenallan , "is recently dead , which makes our
search the more difficult . Furthermore , I am not his heir . He has left
his property to a stranger , as indeed he had every right to do . But as
the heir is like himself a Protestant , he may be unwilling to aid the
inquiry--"

"I trust , " interrupted Mr . Oldbuck , with some feeling , "that you will
find a Protestant can be as honest and honourable as a Catholic . "

The Earl protested that he had no idea of supposing otherwise . 

"Only , " he continued , "there was an old steward on the estate who in all
probability is the only man now living who knows the truth . But it is
not expected that any man will willingly disinherit himself . For if I
have a living son , my father's estates are entailed on him , and the
steward may very likely stand by his master . "

"I have a friend in Yorkshire , " said Mr . Oldbuck , "to whom I can apply
for information as to the character of your brother's heir , and also as
to the disposition of his steward . That is all we can do at present . But
take courage , my lord . I believe that your son is alive . "

In the morning Lord Glenallan returned to the castle in his carriage , 
while Mr . Oldbuck , hearing from Hector that he was going down to
Fairport , in order to see that old Edie Ochiltree had fair play before
the magistrates , offered to bear him company . 

Edie Ochiltree--in prison for thwacking the ribs of Dousterswivel , which
he had done ( or at least poor Steenie Mucklebackit for him ) , and for
stealing the German's fifty pounds , which he had not done--willingly
revealed to Monkbarns what he had refused to breathe to Bailie
Littlejohn of the Fairport magistracy . After some delay Edie was
accordingly liberated on the Antiquary's bail , and immediately
accompanied his good friend to the cottage of old Elspeth Mucklebackit , 
where , by the Earl's request , Oldbuck was to take down a statement from
her lips , such as might be produced in a court of law . But no single
syllable would the old beldame now utter against her ancient mistress . 

"Ha , " she said , at the first question put to her by the Antiquary; "I
thought it would come to this . It's only sitting silent when they
question me . There's nae torture in our days , and if there was , let them
rend me ! It ill becomes a vassal's mouth to betray the bread which it
has eaten . "

Then they told her that her mistress , the Countess Jocelin , was dead , 
hoping this might bring her to confession . But the news had quite an
opposite effect . 

"Dead ! " cried Elspeth , aroused as ever by the sound of her mistress's
name , "then , if she be gone before , the servant must follow . All must
ride when she is in the saddle . Bring my scarf and hood ! Ye wadna hae me
gang in the carriage with my lady , and my hair all abroad in this
fashion ! "

She raised her withered arms , and her hands seemed busied like those of
a woman who puts on a cloak to go a journey . 

"Call Miss Neville , " she continued; "what do you mean by Lady Geraldin ? 
I said Eveline Neville . There's no Lady Geraldin . But tell her to change
her wet gown and not to look so pale . Bairn--what should she do wi' a
bairn ? She has nane , I trow ! Teresa--Teresa--my lady calls us ! Bring a
candle ! The grand staircase is as black before me as a Yule midnight ! 
Coming , my lady , we are coming ! "

With these words , and as if following in the train of her mistress , old
Elspeth , once of the Craigburnfoot , sunk back on the settle , and from
thence sidelong to the floor . 


III . THE HEIR OF GLENALLAN

Meanwhile doom was coming fast upon poor Sir Arthur Wardour . He seemed
to be utterly ruined . The treachery of Dousterswivel , the pressing and
extortionate demands of a firm called Goldiebirds , who held a claim over
his estate , the time-serving of his own lawyers , at last brought the
officers of the law down upon him . He found himself arrested for debt in
his own house . He was about to be sent to prison , when Edie Ochiltree , 
who in his day had been deep in many plots , begged that he might be
allowed to drive over to Tannanburgh , and promised that he would
certainly bring back some good news from the post-office there . 

It was all that Oldbuck , with his best tact and wisdom , could do to keep
Hector MacIntyre from assaulting the officers of the law during the
absence of Edie . Two long hours they waited . The carriage had already
been ordered round to the door to convey Sir Arthur to prison . Miss
Wardour was in agony , her father desperate with shame and grief , when
Edie arrived triumphantly grasping a packet . He delivered it forthwith
to the Antiquary . For Sir Arthur , knowing his own weakness , had put
himself unreservedly into the hands of his abler friend . The packet , 
being opened , was found to contain a writ stopping the proceedings , a
letter of apology from the lawyers who had been most troublesome , and a
note from Captain Wardour , Sir Arthur's son , enclosing a thousand pounds
for his father's immediate needs . It also declared that ere long he
himself would come to the castle along with a distinguished officer , 
Major Neville , who had been appointed to report to the War Office
concerning the state of the defences of the country . 

"Thus , " said the Antiquary , summing up the situation , "was the last
siege of Knockwinnock House laid by Saunders Sweepclean , the bailiff , 
and raised by Edie Ochiltree , the King's Blue-Gown ! "

There was , at the time when the story of the Antiquary and his doings
draws to a close , a daily expectation of a French invasion . Beacons had
been prepared on every hill and headland , and men were set to watch . One
of these beacons had been intrusted to old Caxon the hairdresser , and
one night he saw , directly in the line of the hill to the south which he
was to watch , a flame start suddenly up . It was undoubtedly the token
agreed upon to warn the country of the landing of the French . 

He lighted his beacon accordingly . It threw up to the sky a long
wavering train of light , startling the sea-fowl from their nests , and
reddening the sea beneath the cliffs . Caxon's brother warders , equally
zealous , caught and repeated the signal . The district was soon awake and
alive with the tidings of invasion . 


From far and near the Lowland burghers , the country lairds , the Highland
chiefs and clans responded to the summons . They had been drilling for
long , and now in the dead of the night they marched with speed upon
Fairport , eager to defend that point of probable attack . 

Last of all the Earl of Glenallan came in with a splendidly mounted
squadron of horse , raised among his Lowland tenants , and five hundred
Highland clansmen with their pipes playing stormily in the van . 
Presently also Captain Wardour arrived in a carriage drawn by four
horses , bringing with him Major Neville , the distinguished officer
appointed to the command of the district . The magistrates assembled at
the door of their town-house to receive him . The volunteers , the
yeomanry , the Glenallan clansmen--all were there awaiting the great man . 

What was the astonishment of the people of Fairport , and especially of
the Antiquary , to see descend from the open door of the carriage , --who
but the quiet Mr . Lovel . 

He had brought with him the news that the alarm of invasion was false . 
The beacon which Caxon had seen was only the burning of the mining
machinery in Glen Withershins which had been ordered by Oldbuck and Sir
Arthur to make a final end of Dousterswivel's plots and deceits . 

But there was yet further and more interesting private news . The proofs
that Lovel was indeed the son of the Earl of Glenallan were found to be
overwhelming . His heirship to the title had been fully made out . The
chaplain who had performed his father's wedding had returned from
abroad , exiled by the French Revolution . The witnesses also had been
found . Most decisive of all , among the papers of the Earl's late
brother , there was discovered a duly authenticated account of his
carrying off the child , and of how he had had him educated and pushed on
in the army . 

So that very night the Antiquary enjoyed in some degree the crowning
pleasure of his whole life , in bringing together father and son for the
first time . That is , if the marriage which took place soon after between
his young friend Lovel ( or Lord William Geraldin ) and Miss Isabella
Wardour of Knockwinnock Castle did not turn out to be a yet greater
pleasure . Old Edie still travels from farm to farm , but mostly now
confines himself to the short round between Monkbarns and Knockwinnock . 
It is reported , however , that he means soon to settle with old Caxon , 
who , since the marriage of his daughter to Lieutenant Taffril , has been
given a cottage near the three wigs which he still keeps in order in the
parish , --the minister's , Sir Arthur's , and best of all , that of our good
and well-beloved Antiquary . 


THE END OF THE LAST TALE FROM "THE ANTIQUARY . "

 * * * * *


 "Now , " said Sweetheart , nodding particular
 approval , "that is the way a story ought to end
 up--everything going on from chapter to chapter , 
 with no roundabouts , and everything told about
 everybody right to the very end ! "

 "Hum , " said Hugh John , with a curl of his nose;
 "well , that's done with ! But it was good about the
 Storm and the Duel ! The rest was--"

 "Hush , " said Sweetheart , "remember , it was written
 by Sir Walter . "

 "Sir , " said I to Hugh John , heavily parental , 
 "_The Antiquary_ may not now be much to your
 taste , but the day will come when you may probably
 prefer it to all the rest put together . "

 At these words the young man assumed the expression
 common to boys who are bound to receive the
 wholesome advice of their elders , yet who do so
 with silent but respectful doubt , if not with
 actual disbelief . 

 "Well , " he said , after a long pause , "anyway , the
 Duel _was_ good . And I'd jolly well like to find a
 treasure in Misticot's grave . Can we have another
 snow fight ? "
﻿CHAPTER I

WIGWAM LEGEND OF HIAWATHA [: This story is ascribed to Abraham
le Fort , an Onondaga chief , a graduate of Geneva College . The poem of
Longfellow has given it general interest . Hiawatha is an example of the
intellectual capacity of one of that race of whom it has been said "Take
these Indians in their owne trimme and naturall disposition , and they
bee reported to bee wise , lofty spirited , constant in friendship to one
another: true in their promise , and more industrious than many
others . "--Wood's , "New England's Prospect , " London , 1634 . ]


On the banks of Tioto , or Cross Lake , resided an eminent man who bore
the name of Hiawatha , or the Wise Man . 

This name was given him , as its meaning indicates , on account of his
great wisdom in council and power in war . Hiawatha was of high and
mysterious origin . He had a canoe which would move without paddles , 
obedient to his will , and which he kept with great care and never used
except when he attended the general council of the tribes . It was from
Hiawatha the people learned to raise corn and beans; through his
instructions they were enabled to remove obstructions from the water
courses and clear their fishing grounds; and by him they were helped to
get the mastery over the great monsters which overran the country . The
people listened to him with ever increasing delight; and he gave them
wise laws and maxims from the Great Spirit , for he had been second to
him only in power previous to his taking up his dwelling with mankind . 

Having selected the Onondagas for his tribe , years passed away in
prosperity; the Onondagas assumed an elevated rank for their wisdom and
learning , among the other tribes , and there was not one of these which
did not yield its assent to their superior privilege of lighting the
council-fire . 

But in the midst of the high tide of their prosperity , suddenly there
arose a great alarm at the invasion of a ferocious band of warriors from
the North of the Great Lakes; and as these bands advanced , an
indiscriminate slaughter was made of men , women , and children . 
Destruction fell upon all alike . 

The public alarm was great; and Hiawatha advised them not to waste their
efforts in a desultory manner , but to call a council of all the tribes
that could be gathered together , from the East to the West; and , at the
same time , he appointed a meeting to take place on an eminence on the
banks of the Onondaga Lake . There , accordingly , the chief men assembled , 
while the occasion brought together a vast multitude of men , women , and
children , who were in expectation of some marvellous deliverance . 

Three days elapsed , and Hiawatha did not appear . The multitude began to
fear that he was not coming , and messengers were despatched for him to
Tioto , who found him depressed with a presentiment that evil would
follow his attendance . These fears were overruled by the eager
persuasions of the messengers; and Hiawatha , taking his daughter with
him , put his wonderful canoe in its element and set out for the council . 
The grand assemblage that was to avert the threatened danger appeared
quickly in sight , as he moved rapidly along in his magic canoe; and when
the people saw him , they sent up loud shouts of welcome until the
venerated man landed . A steep ascent led up the banks of the lake to the
place occupied by the council; and , as he walked up , a loud whirring
sound was heard above , as if caused by some rushing current of air . 
Instantly , the eyes of all were directed upward to the sky , where was
seen a dark spot , something like a small cloud , descending rapidly , and
as it approached , enlarging in its size and increasing in velocity . 
Terror and alarm filled the minds of the multitude and they scattered in
confusion . But as soon as he had gained the eminence , Hiawatha stood
still , causing his daughter to do the same--deeming it cowardly to fly , 
and impossible , if it was attempted , to divert the designs of the Great
Spirit . The descending object now assumed a more definite aspect; and , 
as it came nearer , revealed the shape of a gigantic white bird , with
wide-extended and pointed wings . This bird came down with ever
increasing velocity , until , with a mighty swoop , it dropped upon the
girl , crushing her at once to the earth . 

The fixed face of Hiawatha alone indicated his consciousness of his
daughter's death; while in silence he signalled to the warriors , who had
stood watching the event in speechless consternation . One after the
other stepped up to the prostrate bird , which was killed by its violent
fall , and selecting a feather from its snow-white plumage , decorated
himself therewith . [: Since this event , say the Indians of this
tribe , the plumage of the white heron has been used for their
decorations on the war-path . ]

But now a new affliction fell upon Hiawatha; for , on removing the
carcass of the bird , not a trace could be discovered of his daughter . 
Her body had vanished from the earth . Shades of anguish contracted the
dark face of Hiawatha . He stood apart in voiceless grief . No word was
spoken . His people waited in silence , until at length arousing himself , 
he turned to them and walked in calm dignity to the head of the council . 

The first day he listened with attentive gravity to the plans of the
different speakers; on the next day he arose and said: "My friends and
brothers; you are members of many tribes , and have come from a great
distance . We have come to promote the common interest , and our mutual
safety . How shall it be accomplished ? To oppose these Northern hordes in
tribes singly , while we are at variance often with each other , is
impossible . By uniting in a common band of brotherhood we may hope to
succeed . Let this be done , and we shall drive the enemy from our land . 
Listen to me by tribes . You , the Mohawks , who are sitting under the
shadow of the great tree , whose branches spread wide around , and whose
roots sink deep into the earth , shall be the first nation , because you
are warlike and mighty . You , the Oneidas , who recline your bodies
against the everlasting stone that cannot be moved , shall be the second
nation , because you always give wise counsel . You , the Onondagas , who
have your habitation at the foot of the great hills , and are
overshadowed by their crags , shall be the third nation , because you are
greatly gifted in speech . You , the Senecas , whose dwelling is in the
dark forest , and whose home is all over the land , shall be the fourth
nation , because of your superior cunning in hunting . And you , the
Cayugas , the people who live in the open country and possess much
wisdom , shall be the fifth nation , because you understand better the art
of raising corn and beans , and making lodges . Unite , ye five nations , 
and have one common interest , and no foe shall disturb and subdue you . 
You , the people who are the feeble bushes , and you who are a fishing
people , may place yourselves under our protection , and we will defend
you . And you of the South and West may do the same , and we will protect
you . We earnestly desire the alliance and friendship of you all . 
Brothers , if we unite in this great bond , the Great Spirit will smile
upon us , and we shall be free , prosperous , and happy; but if we remain
as we are , we shall be subject to his frown . We shall be enslaved , 
ruined , perhaps annihilated . We may perish under the war-storm , and our
names be no longer remembered by good men , nor be repeated in the dance
and song . Brothers , those are the words of Hiawatha . I have spoken . I am
done . " [: Canassatego , a renowned chief of the Confederacy , in
his remarkable piece of advice to the Colonial Commissioners of
Lancaster in July , 1744 , seems to imply that there was an error in this
plan of Hiawatha , as it did not admit all nations into their Confederacy
with equal rights . ]

The next day his plan of union was considered and adopted by the
council , after which Hiawatha again addressed the people with wise words
of counsel , and at the close of this speech bade them farewell; for he
conceived that his mission to the Iroquois was accomplished , and he
might announce his withdrawal to the skies . He then went down to the
shore , and assumed his seat in his mystical canoe . Sweet music was heard
in the air as he seated himself; and while the wondering multitude stood
gazing at their beloved chief , he was silently wafted from sight , and
they saw him no more . He passed to the Isle of the Blessed , inhabited by
Owayneo [: A name for their Great Spirit in the dialect of the
Iroquois . ] and his manitos . 

 And they said , "Farewell forever ! "
 Said , "Farewell , O Hiawatha ! "
 And the forests , dark and lonely , 
 Moved through all their depths of darkness^
 Sighed , "Farewell , O Hiawatha ! "
 And the waves upon the margin , 
 Rising , rippling on the pebbles , 
 Sobbed , "Farewell , O Hiawatha ! "
 And the heron , the shuh-shu-gah , 
 From her haunts among the fen-lands , 
 Screamed , "Farewell , O Hiawatha ! "
 Thus departed Hiawatha , 
 Hiawatha the Beloved , 
 In the glory of the sunset , 
 In the purple mists of evening , 
 To the regions of the home-wind , 
 Of the northwest wind , Keewaydin , 
 To the Islands of the Blessed , 
 To the kingdom of Ponemah , 
 To the land of the Hereafter . 

[: "The Song of Hiawatha , " by H . W . Longfellow . ]


