In that time in which the portion of Tuscany called Casentino was not
yet subject to the Florentines , but was ruled by its own counts , in the
lands of Poppi , an important place in that valley through which runs the
river Arno , and not far from its source , a son was born to a certain
good man named Paolo , to whom he gave the name of Torello , and whom , 
when a suitable age , he not only taught to fear God , and to lead a
Christian life , but sent to school , that he might learn the first
principles of letters--which he soon did--and to avoid evil companions
and imitate the good . The young Torello , being accustomed to this life , 
and his father dying , for some time proceeded from good to better . 

But that not pleasing our common enemy , who always goes about seeking
whom he may devour , he so tempted Torello--God permitting it , for future
and greater good--that he abandoned a virtuous life , and gave himself to
the pursuit of the pleasures of the world; so that instead of being
praised for his blameless and religious life , he was censured by all , 
and had become the very opposite of what he had at first been . 

But the blessed Lord--who had never abandoned him , though He had left
him to wander , in order to permit him to become a true mirror of
penitence--called him to himself in this manner; as he was one day
wandering and seeking amusement with his idle companions , a cock that
was on a perch outside a window suddenly fell , and alighted on his
shoulder , and crowed three times , and then flew back to the perch . 
Torello , calling to mind how the Apostle Peter had in a similar manner
been made to gee his guilt , awaked from his sleep of vice and sin in a
state of wonder and fear; and thinking that this could have happened
only by divine Providence , and to show him that he was in the power of
the devil , left his companions instantly , and in penitence and tears
sought the Abbot of Poppi , of the order of Vallombrosa; and commending
himself to his prayers , threw himself at his feet , humbly begging for
the robe of a mendicant friar , since he desired to serve God in the
humblest manner . The abbot wondered much , knowing by common report
Torello to be a youth of most incorrect life , to see him thus kneeling
in contrition before him , and endeavoured , together with the monks , to
persuade him to take their habit of St . John Gualberto . But at last , 
seeing he had no heart for it , and remained constant to his first
request , he at last granted it; and he became a poor brother , and almost
a desert hermit , for having received the benediction of the abbot , 
without communicating with either his family or friends , he left that
country and took his way toward the most desert and savage places of the
mountains , wandering among them for eight days , and passing the night
wherever it chanced to overtake him . But having at last come to a great
rock , near a place called Avellanato , he remained there , adopting it for
a cell eight days more , weeping for his sins , praying , and imploring God
to pardon him; living all this time on three small loaves , which he had
brought with him , and on wild herbs like the animals; and being much
pleased with the place , he determined to make a cell under that great
rock , and there spend all the days of this life , serving God with fasts , 
vigils , discipline , and prayers , and bitterly lamenting his past sins
and evil life . 

Having taken this resolution , he went to his own country to put his
affairs in order; and all his relatives and friends came about him , 
praying him with much earnestness , if he sought to serve God , to leave
this life of a wild beast and join some order , living like other monks . 
But all was of no avail; and selling all his goods , he gave the price to
the poor , reserving to himself only a small sum of money to build a
cell . And he returned to his solitude with a mason , who made for him a
miserable cell under that same rock; and he bought near it enough land
for a small garden , and there established himself , practising the most
severe austerities . 

Having now spoken of the penitence and life of the Beato Torello , we
must make mention of the great gifts and grace which he received from
God during his life , and which were often granted to him in behalf of
those who commended themselves to him in faith and devotion . 

A poor woman of Poppi , who had only one son , three years old , going to
the spring to wash her clothes , took him with her; and he having strayed
from her a little way while she was washing , a savage wolf seized him
and carried him away , and the poor woman ' s shrieks could be heard almost
at Poppi , while she could do nothing but commend the child to God . While
the wolf was escaping with his prey between his teeth , he came , as it
pleased God--who thus began to make known the reward of his service--to
the cell of the Beato Torello; who , when he saw this , instantly ordered
the wolf , in God ' s name , to lay the child on the ground , safe and sound;
which command the wolf no sooner heard than he came to him immediately , 
and laid the child at his feet . And after he had , with evident humility , 
received the directions of the holy father , that neither he , nor any of
the wolves his companions , should do any harm to any person of that
country , he departed , and returned to the forest; and the servant of God
took the half-dead child into his cell , where he made a prayer to the
Lord , and he was immediately healed of the wounds the wolf ' s teeth had
made in his throat . And when his mother came seeking him with great
lamentation and sorrow , he graciously restored him to her alive and
well , but with the command that while he lived she should never reveal
this miracle . 

Carlo , Count of Poppi , being very fond of the Beato Torello , sent him by
his steward , one evening in Carnival , a basket full of provisions , 
praying the good father to accept it for love of him . The steward also
carried him many other gifts , which some good ladies , knowing where he
was going , took the opportunity to send by his hand . 

Having arrived at the cell , he presented them all to the padre , who
thanked him much , and returned him the empty baskets; when he took
occasion to enquire , how he , being alone , could possibly eat so much in
one evening . And Torello , seeing that the steward thought him a great
eater , answered:  " I am not alone , as you suppose; my companion will come
from the woods before long , who has a great appetite , and he will help
me . " And the steward , hearing this , hid himself in the wood not far from
the hermitage , to see who this could be who the padre said had such a
fine appetite . He had not waited long when he saw a great wolf go
straight to the door of the saint ' s cell , who opened it for him , and fed
him until he had devoured everything that the steward had brought; and
he then began to caress the saint , as a faithful and affectionate dog
would his master; and this he continued to do until Torello gave him
permission to go , and reminded him that neither he , nor any of his
companions , should do any harm to the people of that place until they
were at such a distance as to be out of hearing of the bell of the
monastery , which the wolf promised to do and obey , by bowing his head . 
The servant , having seen and heard this , returned home , and related it
to the count and the others , to their great amazement . 

There was a lady of Bologna , named Vittoriana , who made a pilgrimage to
the holy place in Vernia , where the glorious St . Francis received the
stigmata; and there her two children fell ill with a violent and
dangerous fever; and being , in consequence , much distressed and
afflicted , she consulted with some ladies from Poppi , whose devotion had
also brought them to the same place , who advised her to take her
children , as soon as possible , to the blessed Torello , and commend them
to him , that by means of his prayers God would restore their health . And
going to him , she commended them to him with faith and tears and hope
beyond the power of words to describe . And truly it was not in vain; for
the holy man , who was most pitiful , kneeled down and prayed to the Lord
for her and her children as only the true servants of God pray; and
having so done , he took some water from the spring of which he usually
drank and gave it to the children , and they were entirely cured and
delivered from that fever . And what is more , the water of that fountain
is to this day called the fountain of St . Torello , and is a sovereign
remedy against every kind of fever to those who drink of it , as
experience has testified and still testifies . 

But at last , in the year of our salvation twelve hundred and eighty-two , 
the saint having reached the eightieth year of his life , and spent them
all in the service of God--many of his good works being unknown--an
angel brought him this message:  " Rejoice , Torello , for the time is come
when thou shalt receive the crown of glory thou hast so long desired , 
and the reward in paradise of ail thy labour in the service of God; for
thirty days from this time , on the sixteenth of March , thou shalt be
delivered from the prison of this world . " 

The blessed Torello , having heard this , continued all his devout
exercises until the end , which approaching , he went to the abbot and
confessed his sins for the last time , and received the holy communion
from his hands; and they embraced each other , and he returned to his
hermitage . And he took leave of one of his disciples , named Pietro , and
exhorted him to persevere in God ' s service; and having with many
affectionate prayers recommended his country and the people of it to the
blessing of God , praying especially that it should not be ravaged by
wolves , he departed in peace . 

And all the people of the parishes around , hearing of his death , 
hastened to the hermitage; and all desiring that his holy body should
repose in their church , a great controversy arose , and much scandal
would have ensued , had not the Abbot of Poppi passed into the midst of
them and convinced them it was the will of God it should be laid in his
monastery; to which they all finally agreed . And a wonderful and
miraculous event occurred; for while they were all standing around the
holy body , a wolf came in with a little pig in his mouth , and passing
through them without fear , placed it at the foot of the bier , and went
away . 


