
In the olden times , tribes of Indians did not always live in one place
as they do now . They sometimes wandered from one valley or woodland to
another . When they came to a sheltered place , where there was pure
running water , and where plenty of game and wood were to be found , they
would build their lodges and light their council fires . 

There they might camp for one moon , or for many moons . As long as their
arrows brought game on the hunting trails near , they would not break
camp . But if game grew scarce , or if for any reason they did not like
the camp ground , they would move farther on . 

Sometimes they would go several days' journey , before they found a
camping place such as they liked . 

The first thing that was done in making a camp was to secure fire and
light the council fire . This fire was always kept burning . It never went
out while they remained . 

The Indians loved the fire . It was the gift of the Great Spirit to the
Red Children . It kept them warm and cooked their food by day , and
protected them by night . 

A line of fires was kept burning around the camp . This protected the Red
Children from the wild animals , for all animals fear fire , and are
charmed by it . They might prowl and howl all night long outside the fire
ring , but never would they attempt to come within that ring . There the
Indians could sleep in peace , guarded by the spirits of the fire . 


The Indian that could make fire first became a chief and leader . When it
was decided to camp at a certain place , a signal would be given . At this
the young braves would leap into the woods , to see which one first could
bring back fire . Each had his own secret way of making it . Usually a
bowstring was twisted about a fire stick , and the stick was turned
rapidly in a groove . In a few seconds , smoke would rise from the sawdust
that formed . After a little fanning a flame would leap forth . 

The Indian whose brain and hand worked swiftest and surest was the
smartest and best man . He became a Firemaker , and was made a chief of
the tribe . He could do something that the rest could not , --at least he
had proved himself to be more skillful . Such a man , it was thought , had
a better understanding of all things , and therefore could tell the rest
of the tribe what ought to be done . 

He no longer was just a man who ate and slept , walked and ran . He was a
man with a mind . He could think and could do things . So he became a
Firemaker chief , and he helped the tribe to think and do . 

The Iroquois Red Children believe that there are three kinds of men:
those that use the body only; those that use body and mind; and those
that use body , mind , and spirit . 

Now it happened that sometimes an Indian grew to be so kind and so
great , that he could not only strike the fire we see , but the fire we do
not see , --the fire of love that burns in the hearts of people . 


When an Indian could strike this kind of fire , and warm the hearts not
only of his own tribe but of all tribes , so that they came to love one
another , he was a great chief , a Peacemaker chief . Such a man would go
from tribe to tribe , teaching the people how they should do , so that all
might live in peace and plenty , like brothers . 

To be a Peacemaker was the highest seat an Indian could take . Few
Indians became Peacemaker chiefs , and they were the great men of the
tribe . 

Indian women also might become Peacemakers . At one time the Iroquois had
a Peace Wigwam , where all disputes and quarrels were settled . 

The most beautiful , just , and fair-minded woman of all the tribes was
chosen to sit in this wigwam . It was her duty to tend the Peace fire , 
and to see that it never went out . She also kept a pot of hominy always
steaming over the fire . 

If two Indians had a dispute , it was the custom for them to run to the
Peacemaker's wigwam . They entered from opposite sides . Inside the
wigwam , a deerskin curtain separated them from each other . 


The Peacemaker would listen to the grievance of the one and then to that
of the other . Then she would draw aside the curtain , get the enemies
together , and settle the dispute with justice . 

The two would then eat of the hominy , and depart in peace , --no longer
enemies , but friends . 

No nation could fight another nation without the consent of the
Peacemaker . Because the peacewomen were wise , and just , and kind , and
taught men to love , not fight each other , the Iroquois were for many
years at peace . 

But one day , it is said , a Peacewoman proved untrue to her trust . She
thought more of her own happiness than that of the nation . 


This woman was very beautiful , and the people loved her . For some time
she sat in the Peace Wigwam , and tended faithfully the Peace fire . 

One day an Oneida and a Cayuga chief fell to quarreling . They sought the
Peace Wigwam . As they entered and saw the young Peacewoman tending the
fire , each thought he had never seen a woman so beautiful . 

Into the heart of each there leaped the desire that she might tend his
wigwam fire . 

The Peacemaker listened to the quarrel of the young chiefs and settled
it justly . Then each tried to persuade her to leave the Peace fire and
return with him to his lodge . But the Peacemaker said , "No , I must tend
the fire , it must be kept burning . " The chiefs departed with heavy
hearts . 

But the Oneida chief could not forget the beautiful woman . When a moon
had passed , he returned to the Peace Wigwam . This time he persuaded the
Peacemaker to leave her fire and return with him to sit at his wigwam
door . 

The Peace fire flickered and went out . The Iroquois again went on the
warpath , and for many , many moons , they fought and suffered and died . 


