Many, many moons before the White man came, a little Indian boy was left
in the woods. It was in the days when animals and men understood each
other better than they do now.

An old mother bear found the little Indian boy.

She felt very sorry for him. She told the little boy not to cry, for she
would take him home with her; she had a nice wigwam in the hollow of a
big tree.

Old Mother Bear had two cubs of her own, but she had a place between her
great paws for a third. She took the little papoose, and she hugged him
warm and close. She fed him as she did her own little cubs.

The boy grew strong. He was very happy with his adopted mother and
brothers. They had a warm lodge in the hollow of the great tree. As
they grew older, Mother Bear found for them all the honey and nuts that
they could eat.

From sunrise to sunset, the little Indian boy played with his cub
brothers. He did not know that he was different from them. He thought he
was a little bear, too. All day long, the boy and the little bears
played and had a good time. They rolled, and tumbled, and wrestled in
the forest leaves. They chased one another up and down the bear tree.

Sometimes they had a matched game of hug, for every little bear must
learn to hug. The one who could hug the longest and the tightest won the
game.

Old Mother Bear watched her three dear children at their play. She would
have been content and happy, but for one thing. She was afraid some harm
would come to the boy. Never could she quite forget the bear hunters.
Several times they had scented her tree, but the wind had thrown them
off the trail.

Once, from her bear-tree window, she had thrown out rabbit hairs as she
saw them coming. The wind had blown the rabbit hairs toward the hunters.
As they fell near the hunters, they had suddenly changed into rabbits
and the hunters had given chase.

At another time, Mother Bear tossed some partridge feathers to the wind
as the hunters drew near her tree. A flock of partridges went whirring
into the woods with a great noise, and the hunters ran after them.

But on this day, Mother Bear's heart was heavy. She knew that now the
big bear hunters were coming. No rabbits or partridges could lead these
hunters from the bear trail, for they had dogs with four eyes.
(Foxhounds have a yellow spot over each eye which makes them seem
double-eyed.) These dogs were never known to miss a bear tree. Sooner or
later they would scent it.

Mother Bear thought she might be able to save herself and her cubs. But
what would become of the boy? She loved him too well to let the bear
hunters kill him.

Just then the porcupine, the Chief of the animals, passed by the bear
tree. Mother Bear saw him. She put her head out the bear-tree window and
called to him. He came and sat under the bear-tree window, and listened
to Mother Bear's story of her fears for the boy.

When she had finished, Chief Porcupine said he would call a council of
the animals, and see if they could not save the boy.

Now the Chief had a big voice. As soon as he raised his voice, even the
animals away on the longest trails heard. They ran at once and gathered
under the council tree. There was a loud roar, and a great flapping of
wings, for the birds came, too.

Chief Porcupine told them about the fears of Mother Bear, and of the
danger to the boy.

"Now," said the Chief, "which one of you will take the boy, and save him
from the bear hunters?"

It happened that some animals were present that were jealous of man.
These animals had held more than one secret council, to plan how they
could do away with him. They said he was becoming too powerful. He knew
all they knew,--and more.

The beaver did not like man, because men could build better houses than
he.

The fox said that man had stolen his cunning, and could now outwit him.

The wolf and the panther objected to man, because he could conceal
himself and spring with greater surety than they.

The raccoon said that man was more daring, and could climb higher than
he.

The deer complained that man could outrun him.

So when Chief Porcupine asked who would take the boy and care for him,
each of these animals in turn said that he would gladly do so.

Mother Bear sat by and listened as each offered to care for the boy. She
did not say anything, but she was thinking hard,--for a bear. At last
she spoke.

To the beaver she said, "You cannot take the boy; you will drown him on
the way to your lodge."

To the fox she said, "You cannot take him; you would teach him to cheat
and steal, while pretending to be a friend; neither can the wolf or the
panther have him, for they are counting on having something good to eat.

"You, deer, lost your upper teeth for eating human flesh. And, too, you
have no home, you are a tramp.

"And you, raccoon, I cannot trust, for you would coax him to climb so
high that he would fall and die.

"No, none of you can have the boy."

Now a great bird that lives in the sky had flown into the council tree,
while the animals were speaking. But they had not seen him.

When Mother Bear had spoken, this wise old eagle flew down, and said,
"Give the boy to me, Mother Bear. No bird is so swift and strong as the
eagle. I will protect him. On my great wings I will bear him far away
from the bear hunters.

"I will take him to the wigwam of an Indian friend, where a little
Indian boy is wanted."

Mother Bear looked into the eagle's keen eyes. She saw that he could see
far.

Then she said, "Take him, eagle, I trust him to you. I know you will
protect the boy."

The eagle spread wide his great wings. Mother Bear placed the boy on his
back, and away they soared, far from the council woods.

The eagle left the boy, as he had promised, at the door of a wigwam
where a little Indian boy was wanted.

This was the first young American to be saved by an American eagle.

The boy grew to be a noble chief and a great hunter. No hunter could hit
a bear trail so soon as he, for he knew just where and how to find the
bear trees. But never was he known to cut down a bear tree, or to kill a
bear.

However, many were the wolf, panther, and deerskins that hung in his
lodge. The hunter's wife sat and made warm coats from the fox and beaver
skins which the hunter father brought in from the chase. But never was
the hunter, his wife, or his children seen to wear a bear-skin coat.




HOW THE TURKEY BUZZARD GOT HIS SUIT

It was a long, long time ago, when the earth was very young. Trees and
flowers were growing everywhere, but there were no birds. One morning
the Great Spirit drew back the blanket from the door of his wigwam in
the sky. He looked upon the earth and smiled, for he saw that his work
was good.

"Today," thought he, "I will make big butterflies, to fly in and out
among the beautiful trees and flowers of the earth. They shall sing as
they fly."

Then the Great Spirit spoke, and the tree tops were full of birds,--but
they had no feathers.

All day he watched them fly and listened to their songs. But their naked
bodies and long legs did not please him. Before the sun had set he had
made feathered suits, of every size and color, to cover them.

That night, as the birds hid their heads under their wings, the Great
Spirit spoke to them. He told about the feathered suits he had made for
them, and where these suits could be found.

A council was called next day by the birds. They chose _Gah gah go wah_,
the Turkey Buzzard, to get the suits. He could fly over a long trail and
not be tired.

The birds told him that if he would go, he might have the first choice
of the suits of feathers, but he must try on no suit more than once.

Turkey Buzzard promised and set out toward the setting sun. Twice the
sun set, and three times it rose, before he found the feathered suits.
There were many of them, and they were very beautiful. He could not make
up his mind which one he would like best to wear.

Then he remembered that he could try on each suit of feathers once. So
he began to put them on.

The feathers of the first suit were too long. They trailed on the ground
as he walked. Neither could he fly well in them. Turkey Buzzard laid
that suit aside.

The next suit shone like gold. The feathers were a beautiful yellow.
Turkey Buzzard put it on and strutted up and down the forest.

"Oh, how handsome I am!" he said. "But I must not keep this, for if I
did, I should shine so like the face of the Great Spirit, that all the
other birds would see me."

And he slipped off the suit of yellow feathers as quickly as possible.

A third suit was of pure white feathers. Turkey Buzzard thought it
looked very beautiful. It was a perfect fit.

"But it will get dirty too soon," he said. "I will not choose this."

And this, too, was laid aside.

There were not enough feathers in the fourth suit. Turkey Buzzard
shivered with cold. It was not warm enough. He would not have it.

There were too many feathers, and too many pieces, in the fifth suit. It
took too much time to put it on. Turkey Buzzard did not want that.

So he went from one suit to another, trying on and taking off. Always he
had some new fault to find. Something was wrong with each one. Nothing
quite pleased him. No suit was just right.

At last there was but one suit left. It was not pretty. It was a plain,
dull color,--and very short of feathers at the neck and head. Turkey
Buzzard put it on. He did not like it. It did not fit him well: it was
cut too low in the neck. Turkey Buzzard thought it was the homeliest
suit of all. But it was the last suit, so he kept it on.

Then _Gah gah go wah_, the Turkey Buzzard, gathered up the suits and
flew back to the bird lodge. He still wore the plain, dull-colored suit.

The birds again called a council. Each was told to select a suit from
those that _Gah gah go wah_ had brought, and put it on. This they did.

Then the birds in their beautiful feathered suits began to walk and fly
about the Turkey Buzzard, and to make fun of his plain, dull dress.

But _Gah gah go wah_ held his head high. He walked proudly about among
the birds. He looked with scorn on their beautiful suits. After a time
he spoke.

He said, "_Gah gah go wah_, the Turkey Buzzard, does not want your
suits. He had the pick of them all. He likes his own suit best."

 Adapted from Erminie Smith's _Myths of the Iroquois_.




WHY THE PARTRIDGE DRUMS

It was after the Great Spirit had made all the beautiful birds, that the
Evil Spirit came along. He saw the beautiful birds and heard their
beautiful songs. He saw that the earth people liked the birds and liked
to hear them sing.

Now the Evil Spirit did not wish people to be happy, so he said, "I will
make a bird that will make people afraid. I will make a big bird that
will not sing, but will make a great noise."

So the Evil Spirit went to work. In a short time he had made a big bird,
that could not sing, but could drum.

The big bird flew away into the wood. That night a drumming noise was
heard in the wood. The people were afraid. They could not sleep, because
of the noise.

In the morning, they went into the woods to search for the noise. Deep
in the forest could still be heard that strange drumming. They followed
it, until they came to a deep, dark place in the woods. There was a loud
fluttering and whirring of wings, and a great bird flew out from among
them, along the ground and over the trees.

The people were afraid. They called to the Great Spirit to help them.

The Great Spirit was near. He heard their cry, and went after the bird,
for he was very angry.

The Great Spirit said, "I will not have my people frightened by this
great bird; it shall die."

The big bird gave the Great Spirit a long chase. At last the Great
Spirit came upon it. He seized it, and threw it against a large tree.

As the big bird struck the tree, drops of blood flew in all directions.
They changed into smaller birds that went whirring into the woods, just
as the big bird had done. There they began to drum.

Like the big bird, these smaller birds like to startle people. They
flutter out from under the leaves, and with a whirring noise they fly
far into the wood. There they perch on an old log, or a rock, and drum
with their wings.

Some of the earth people say they are drumming for their mates. But
others still think that the birds drum to make people afraid.

So this is how the Indians say the partridges came to be. This is why
they drum, and why some of the earth children still love to hunt
partridges.


