Many , many moons before the White man came , a little Indian boy was left
in the woods . It was in the days when animals and men understood each
other better than they do now . 

An old mother bear found the little Indian boy . 

She felt very sorry for him . She told the little boy not to cry , for she
would take him home with her; she had a nice wigwam in the hollow of a
big tree . 

Old Mother Bear had two cubs of her own , but she had a place between her
great paws for a third . She took the little papoose , and she hugged him
warm and close . She fed him as she did her own little cubs . 

The boy grew strong . He was very happy with his adopted mother and
brothers . They had a warm lodge in the hollow of the great tree . As
they grew older , Mother Bear found for them all the honey and nuts that
they could eat . 



From sunrise to sunset , the little Indian boy played with his cub
brothers . He did not know that he was different from them . He thought he
was a little bear , too . All day long , the boy and the little bears
played and had a good time . They rolled , and tumbled , and wrestled in
the forest leaves . They chased one another up and down the bear tree . 

Sometimes they had a matched game of hug , for every little bear must
learn to hug . The one who could hug the longest and the tightest won the
game . 

Old Mother Bear watched her three dear children at their play . She would
have been content and happy , but for one thing . She was afraid some harm
would come to the boy . Never could she quite forget the bear hunters . 
Several times they had scented her tree , but the wind had thrown them
off the trail . 

Once , from her bear-tree window , she had thrown out rabbit hairs as she
saw them coming . The wind had blown the rabbit hairs toward the hunters . 
As they fell near the hunters , they had suddenly changed into rabbits
and the hunters had given chase . 

At another time , Mother Bear tossed some partridge feathers to the wind
as the hunters drew near her tree . A flock of partridges went whirring
into the woods with a great noise , and the hunters ran after them . 


But on this day , Mother Bear's heart was heavy . She knew that now the
big bear hunters were coming . No rabbits or partridges could lead these
hunters from the bear trail , for they had dogs with four eyes . 
 ( Foxhounds have a yellow spot over each eye which makes them seem
double-eyed . ) These dogs were never known to miss a bear tree . Sooner or
later they would scent it . 

Mother Bear thought she might be able to save herself and her cubs . But
what would become of the boy ? She loved him too well to let the bear
hunters kill him . 


Just then the porcupine , the Chief of the animals , passed by the bear
tree . Mother Bear saw him . She put her head out the bear-tree window and
called to him . He came and sat under the bear-tree window , and listened
to Mother Bear's story of her fears for the boy . 

When she had finished , Chief Porcupine said he would call a council of
the animals , and see if they could not save the boy . 

Now the Chief had a big voice . As soon as he raised his voice , even the
animals away on the longest trails heard . They ran at once and gathered
under the council tree . There was a loud roar , and a great flapping of
wings , for the birds came , too . 

Chief Porcupine told them about the fears of Mother Bear , and of the
danger to the boy . 

"Now , " said the Chief , "which one of you will take the boy , and save him
from the bear hunters ? "

It happened that some animals were present that were jealous of man . 
These animals had held more than one secret council , to plan how they
could do away with him . They said he was becoming too powerful . He knew
all they knew , --and more . 

The beaver did not like man , because men could build better houses than
he . 

The fox said that man had stolen his cunning , and could now outwit him . 

The wolf and the panther objected to man , because he could conceal
himself and spring with greater surety than they . 


The raccoon said that man was more daring , and could climb higher than
he . 

The deer complained that man could outrun him . 

So when Chief Porcupine asked who would take the boy and care for him , 
each of these animals in turn said that he would gladly do so . 

Mother Bear sat by and listened as each offered to care for the boy . She
did not say anything , but she was thinking hard , --for a bear . At last
she spoke . 

To the beaver she said , "You cannot take the boy; you will drown him on
the way to your lodge . "

To the fox she said , "You cannot take him; you would teach him to cheat
and steal , while pretending to be a friend; neither can the wolf or the
panther have him , for they are counting on having something good to eat . 

"You , deer , lost your upper teeth for eating human flesh . And , too , you
have no home , you are a tramp . 

"And you , raccoon , I cannot trust , for you would coax him to climb so
high that he would fall and die . 

"No , none of you can have the boy . "

Now a great bird that lives in the sky had flown into the council tree , 
while the animals were speaking . But they had not seen him . 

When Mother Bear had spoken , this wise old eagle flew down , and said , 
"Give the boy to me , Mother Bear . No bird is so swift and strong as the
eagle . I will protect him . On my great wings I will bear him far away
from the bear hunters . 

"I will take him to the wigwam of an Indian friend , where a little
Indian boy is wanted . "

Mother Bear looked into the eagle's keen eyes . She saw that he could see
far . 

Then she said , "Take him , eagle , I trust him to you . I know you will
protect the boy . "

The eagle spread wide his great wings . Mother Bear placed the boy on his
back , and away they soared , far from the council woods . 

The eagle left the boy , as he had promised , at the door of a wigwam
where a little Indian boy was wanted . 

This was the first young American to be saved by an American eagle . 

The boy grew to be a noble chief and a great hunter . No hunter could hit
a bear trail so soon as he , for he knew just where and how to find the
bear trees . But never was he known to cut down a bear tree , or to kill a
bear . 

However , many were the wolf , panther , and deerskins that hung in his
lodge . The hunter's wife sat and made warm coats from the fox and beaver
skins which the hunter father brought in from the chase . But never was
the hunter , his wife , or his children seen to wear a bear-skin coat . 



