A long , long time ago , some Indians were running along a trail that led
to an Indian settlement . As they ran , a rabbit jumped from the bushes
and sat before them . 

The Indians stopped , for the rabbit still sat up before them and did not
move from the trail . They shot their arrows at him , but the arrows came
back unstained with blood . 

A second time they drew their arrows . Now no rabbit was to be seen . 
Instead , an old man stood on the trail . He seemed to be weak and sick . 


The old man asked them for food and a place to rest . They would not
listen but went on to the settlement . 

Slowly the old man followed them , down the trail to the wigwam village . 
In front of each wigwam , he saw a skin placed on a pole . This he knew
was the sign of the clan to which the dwellers in that wigwam belonged . 

First he stopped at a wigwam where a wolf skin hung . He asked to enter , 
but they would not let him . They said , "We want no sick men here . "

On he went toward another wigwam . Here a turtle's shell was hanging . But
this family would not let him in . 

He tried a wigwam where he saw a beaver skin . He was told to move on . 


The Indians who lived in a wigwam where a deer skin was seen , were just
as unkind . Nor was he permitted to enter wigwams where hung hawk , snipe , 
and heron skins . 

At last he came to a wigwam where a bear skin hung . 

"I will ask once more for a place to rest , " he thought . 

And here a kind old woman lived . She brought food for him to eat , and
spread soft skins for him to lie upon . 

The old man thanked her . He said that he was very sick . He told the
woman what plants to gather in the wood , to make him well again . 

This she did , and soon he was healed . 

A few days later the old man was again taken sick . Again he told the
woman what roots and leaves to gather . She did as she was told , and
soon he was well . 


Many times the old man fell sick . Each time he had a different sickness . 
Each time he told the woman what plants and herbs to find to cure him . 
Each time she remembered what she had been told . 

Soon this woman of the Bear clan knew more about healing than all the
other people . 

One day , the old man told her that the Great Spirit had sent him to
earth , to teach the Indian people the secrets of healing . 

"I came , sick and hungry , to many a wigwam door . No blanket was drawn
aside for me to pass in . You alone lifted the blanket from your wigwam
door and bade me enter . 

"You are of the Bear clan , therefore all other clans shall come to the
Bear clan for help in sickness . 

"You shall teach all the clans what plants , and roots , and leaves to
gather , that the sick may be healed . 

"And the Bear shall be the greatest and strongest of the clans . "

The Indian woman lifted her face to the Great Spirit to thank him for
this great gift and knowledge of healing . When she turned again to the
man , he had disappeared . 

No one was there , but a rabbit was running swiftly down the trail . 




