A fox was running through the wood near a river . He had a fish in his
mouth . 

The fish had been stolen from an Indian who lived down the stream . The
fox had been passing near the Indian's wigwam . He saw the fish hanging
by the fire . It was cleaned and ready to cook . 

"What a tasty breakfast ! " thought the fox . "I think I will watch the man
eat . "

Soon the Indian went into the wigwam . The fox slipped up to the fire . He
seized the fish , and ran away with it . 

When the Indian came back , he had no breakfast . The fish was gone . No
fox was to be seen . 

The fox ran along , feeling much pleased with himself . 

"What a cunning fox I am , " he chuckled . "I will play another foxy trick . 
This time it shall be on the bear I see coming . "

He ran up a tree that had been bent half way to earth by the West Wind . 
There he began to eat his fish . He smacked his lips so loudly that the
bear heard him . 

The bear stopped under the tree , and asked , "What are you eating that
tastes so good ? "

For answer the fox threw down a bit of the fish . The bear smacked his
lips and cried , "More ! More ! "

"Go to the river , swim out to the big log , and catch your own fish , "
called the fox . "It's very easy ! Just drop your tail into the water . 
Hold it there till a fish comes along and bites , then pull it up . That
is the way I catch my fish . You can catch all the fish you want with
your own tail . "

The bear hurried on to the river . He swam to the log and dropped his
tail into the water , as the fox had advised . 

All day he sat and fished with his tail , --for bears then had very long
tails . 

The sun set , but no fish had pulled his tail . All night the bear sat on
the log and fished . Cold North Wind blew his breath over the water . The
river grew still and white . 

Towards morning , the bear felt that his tail was getting very heavy . Now
at last he was sure he had a fish . He tried to pull it up . But alas ! his
tail was frozen fast in the ice . 

Then the fox came along . He laughed long and loudly at the bear , and
asked if the fishing was good . 

Some dogs heard the fox , and came tearing through the thick underbrush . 
They saw the fox and started after him . 

The fox slyly led them on to the frozen river toward the bear . The bear
saw them coming , and called to the fox to go around some other way . The
fox made believe he did not hear , and came straight on to the bear to
ask him what he had said . 

The dogs leaped upon the bear . The bear struggled . He gave one great
pull , and freed himself from the ice . He struck at the dogs so fiercely
with his great paws , that they soon left him , and went on after the fox . 

Dogs have been running after foxes ever since . 

When the bear got his breath , he stood up and looked around at his tail . 
He found he had only a small piece left . Most of his tail had been left
in the ice . 

This is why bears have short tails , and why dogs still love to chase the
fox . 


