
Some moons after the council when the birds chose their feathered suits , 
a second council was called . The purpose of this council was to see
which bird could fly to heaven , and bring a song to earth . 

When all the birds had arrived and were perched upon the council tree , 
the wise old owl spoke . 

"Friends and brothers , listen , " said the owl . "Many of you have strong
wings , but your voices are not beautiful . High , high up in the sky , a
long trail beyond the clouds , is the Happy Hunting Ground . 

"There live all our brothers of the wood , whom the Great Spirit has
called . They sing songs more beautiful than any heard on earth . 

"The bird that can fly beyond the clouds will hear that singing . He
shall bring a song to earth . Who will fly the Great Sky Trail , and bring
a song to earth ? Who-whoo ! Who-whoo ! Who-whoo ! "

At this , all the birds that were swift of wing flew high in the air . 
They circled round and round to show their skill . Then they disappeared
in the clouds . 

But one by one they dropped to earth; for when they had reached the
Great Sky Trail beyond the clouds , they were too tired to take it . 

At last the eagle arose and stretched his great wings . 

"Listen , " he said , "for the Chief of Birds speaks . No other bird is so
swift and so strong as the eagle . He has circled the earth . He has flown
to the rim of the world . The eagle will fly the Great Sky Trail and
bring the song to earth . "

A little brown thrush sat near the eagle . 

"Oh , " he thought , "how I would like to bring that song to earth ! "

But he was so small , and his wings were so tired ! 

Then an idea popped into the little brown head of the thrush . He hopped
softly to the back of the eagle , and hid in the thick feathers near the
neck . So small and light was the thrush , that the eagle did not feel his
weight . He did not know that the little brown thrush was on his
back , --and the other birds did not tell him . 

The eagle spread his great wings . Up , and up , and up , they soared . The
council wood became a little speck and then was seen no more . Over , and
under , and through the clouds , on , and on , and on , they sailed , along
the Great Sky Trail . 


At last the eagle's strength began to fail . He could go no further . The
great wings of the chief of birds could beat the air no longer . They
fell at his side . 

The little brown thrush felt the eagle quiver and begin to drop toward
the earth . 

Then away flew the little brown thrush . The air was so light it seemed
easy to fly . On and on he went , for he was not tired . He had had a ride
almost to heaven . 

"Now , " he thought , "I will go on and will get the song . "

For some time , the little brown thrush flew along the Great Sky Trail . 
All at once the air seemed full of song . He knew he was nearing the
Happy Hunting Ground . 

He listened . One song seemed more beautiful to him than the rest . Again
and again he listened . He caught the notes . He sang them many times , 
until he was sure that he could carry the song to earth . 

Then down , and down , and down , he floated , through clouds and storms and
sunshine , back to Mother Earth . 

Very happy , he flew toward the council wood . He was so full of his
beautiful song and the wonderful Sky Trail , he thought he must pour out
his song at once . 

But when he reached the council wood , he dared not open his mouth ! He
remembered that he had stolen his ride part way to heaven , --and he knew
the other birds knew it . 

But that song ! he must sing it ! He thought his throat would burst , if he
did not sing ! 

So the little brown thrush flew off by himself , into a deep , dark part
of the wood . There , hidden by the brush and the bushes , he poured forth
the song he had heard on the Great Sky Trail . 

Men hearing it to-day , say , "Listen , a hermit thrush ! What a beautiful
song ! But he is such a shy bird , one seldom can catch a glimpse of him . "

They do not know why he keeps so close under cover . 


