A hound was chasing a hare through the woods.
Some wolves and panthers were chasing a bull that had been feeding in
the valley near the woods. For some time they had been trying to run him
down, but they did not seem to gain on him.

When the wolves and panthers saw that they were not gaining on the bull,
they halted to take counsel. They decided that it would take a whole day
of hard running to get the bull, and a hound was near! Why not go for
the hound?

All agreed. They set off for the hound.

Now the bull had heard the wolves and panthers take council, and he,
too, set off for the woods.

As he neared the wood, the bull called to the hound and warned him that
a pack of wolves and panthers was after him. Just then they came into
sight. The hound dared not meet them alone, and he knew not which way to
turn.

Then the bull called, "Come, jump on my back. I can outrun them."

The hound ran and leaped on the back of the bull, and away they went.

The bull and the hound talked as they ran. The bull said he thought the
wolves would soon grow tired, fall back, and give up the chase. But he
was wrong. They were too angry at being outwitted.

"You think to take our game from us," they howled at the bull. "But we
will eat hound meat to-night."

The bull saw it was a run for life. All day he ran. For a time it was
easy to outrun the wolves and panthers, but at last they began to press
hard upon him.

As the sun dropped out of the sky, the bull felt his knees begin to
weaken. The weight of the hound was telling on him. A moment later, he
stumbled and fell.

In an instant, the pack was upon them. But with one leap, the hound
cleared the pack and was off down the trail.

The weaker wolves and panthers leaped upon the bull. The stronger went
on.

But now the best of them were no match for the hound. He was fresh and
strong, for he had been riding all day. They were tired and worn from
the long chase, and soon they gave it up.

Because the hound is able to save his strength for the end of the chase,
he can now outrun not only wolves and panthers, but all the other
animals.


