At one time , the animals had tribes and chiefs , like men . It was when
the porcupine was chief , that a council was called . 

A great fire was lighted , for it was night . When all the animals were
seated around the fire , the porcupine spoke . 


"Friends , " he said , "we have met here to settle a great question: 'Shall
we have night all the time , or day ? '" At this , all the animals began to
talk at once . There was great confusion . The night animals kept
shouting , "Night , night ! Always night ! " Others of the animals cried , 
"Day , day ! Always day ! " Still others called for "Day and night ! "

There was so much noise that it could not be decided what was best . 

At last the animals grew tired of calling . One by one the voices grew
fainter , and the shouting ceased . Of the night animals , the voice of the
bear alone was heard . He had a big voice and still kept calling , "Night , 
night ! Always night ! "

The animals who wanted day all the time , and those who wanted day and
night , also became quiet , --all except the chipmunk . He chattered on , "We
will have light--and then night . We will have light--and then night . 
Chee , chee , chee ! "

Then the bear , too , became tired . He was fat and lazy , and so sleepy ! He
thought he would take a short nap . 

But all night long the wide-awake little chipmunk kept up his song . Not
for a moment did he stop to rest . Out of the dark came his voice , sure
and cheery , "We will have light--and then night . We will have
light--and then night ! Chee , chee , chee ! "

And before the animals knew it , the sun began to rise . 

At the first rays of light , the bear sat up , blinked , and rubbed his
eyes . He saw that while he had slept , light had indeed come . He knew
that he and the night animals had been beaten in the council , and that
the chipmunk and the animals who wanted day and night had won . 

The bear was very angry . He struck at the chipmunk with his paw . But he
was clumsy , and the chipmunk was spry ! 

The chipmunk laughed and sprang into a hole of a hollow tree near by . 
But those black stripes on the chipmunk's back show where the paw of the
black bear touched him as he slipped into the tree . 

Ever since this council , and the little chipmunk called so long and loud
for "light and night , " we have had day and night . 


