The dog is the Indian ' s best friend . He is the comrade by day and the
protector by night . As long as the Indian ' s dog has strength , he will
fight for his friend . 

The Indian says this is how the dog came to take his part . 

An Indian and his dogs went into the woods to hunt . It was in the days
when dogs and men could talk together , and each understood the language
of the other . 

When they reached the woods , the dogs began to talk with the Indian . 
They told him many wonderful things about the woods , which he did not
know . They taught him many tricks of the chase: how to scent and track
the game , and where to look for trails . 


The man listened to what the dogs said , and he did as they told him . 
Soon the sledge which the dogs had drawn to the woods was piled high
with deer and other game . 

Never had the Indian ' s arrows brought him so much game . Never had he met
with such success in hunting . He was so pleased that he said to the
dogs ,  " Always shall I talk with you , give ear to what you say , and be
one of you . " 

 " Ah , but listen ! " said the dogs .  " If you wish to be one of us , you must
live under the law of dogs , not men . Animals have laws different from
those of men . When two dogs meet for the first time , they try their
strength to see which is the better dog . 

 " Men do not fight when strangers meet , they shake hands . As we fight
strange dogs , so you , too , must fight strange men , to see which is the
best man , --if you are to live under the law of dogs . " 

The man said he would think it over , and at sunrise give his answer . 
Indians always sleep before deciding a question . 

Next morning , the man said he would live under the law of animals , and
fight strange men . 

The following day , the man made ready to leave the woods . From the
basswood , he made a strong harness for the dogs , so that they could draw
the load of game back to the camp for him . 


When the sun was high , the man and the dogs started with the sledge
load of game . They had not gone far before they saw two strange Indians
coming . 

 " Now , " said the dogs to the man ,  " remember you are living under the
dog ' s law . You must fight these strange men . " 

The man attacked first one Indian and then the other . At last both
turned on him , and when they left him , he was nearly dead . At this , the
dogs took a hand . They leaped upon the Indians and drove them from the
woods . Then they came back to where their friend lay on the ground , and
began to talk with him and lick his face . 

The man could not speak for some time , but when his voice came to him , 
he said to the dogs ,  " No longer do I wish to live under the law of
animals . No more shall I fight strangers . From this time , I shall shake
hands with strangers , and bid them welcome . From this time , I shall be a
man and live under the law of men . " 

 " Then , " said the dogs sadly ,  " we shall no longer be able to talk with
you , and tell you the things that we know . But we will always stand by
you . We will be your friends and will fight for you , when you need us as
you did to-day . " 

This is why the Indian and his dog are now unable to speak each other ' s
language . This is also why an Indian ' s dog will fight to the death for
his friend . 

Not only is the dog a true friend to the Indian in this world , but in
the next as well . It seems that the soul of an Indian on its journey to
the Happy Hunting Ground must cross a deep , swift-running stream . On
either side of this dark river , there stand two dogs who hold in their
teeth a great log upon which the souls pass . 

The soul of the Indian who has been kind to his dog crosses the log
easily , for the dogs stand guard . As the soul of such an Indian reaches
the river , they say ,  " This Indian was kind to his dog . He gave him of
his own food , and the dog always had a warm place by his fire . We will
help this Indian to cross . " 

Then the dogs grip the log firmly in their teeth , and hold it steady
while the soul of the kind Indian passes over . 

But if the soul of an Indian who has been unkind to his dog comes to the
river , the dogs say ,  " This man was cruel to his dog . He gave his dog no
place by the fire , he beat him , he let him go hungry . This man shall not
cross . " 

Then the dogs grip the log lightly in their teeth , and when the soul of
the unkind Indian is half way across , they turn it quickly to one side , 
and the soul is thrown into the deep , dark river . 

Many an Indian has been kind to his dog , that he might make sure of a
safe crossing on that log . 


