
In the days when there was no one living in this country but the
Indians , there were no houses; there were only Indian wigwams . There
were no roads and no streets , but Indian trails . 

At that time there grew a wonderful chestnut , which the Indians used in
their cooking . A very small bit of this chestnut grated into a kettle
would make a potful of porridge . 


In a certain wigwam lived Deerheart and Sky Elk , and their little son
Greedy Fawn . The mother was called Deerheart because she was so loving , 
and gentle , and kind . The father was named Sky Elk because he was so
strong and fleet of foot . Greedy Fawn , too , came rightly by his name . 
You will soon know why . 

One day , Deerheart and Sky Elk went on a long trail . As they left the
wigwam , they said to Greedy Fawn , "Do not touch the chestnut , do not
build a fire , while we are away . "

Greedy Fawn promised . He watched his father and mother disappear down
the western trail . Then he went back to the wigwam . 

"Now , " thought he , "I will have all the porridge I want . "

So he ran and gathered some sticks . He built a fire with the sticks . 
Then he hung the kettle over the fire , and put some water in it . Then he
found the chestnut . He grated a little of the chestnut into the kettle , 
and began to stir . Then he grated some more , and some more , and some
more . 

Faster and faster Greedy Fawn stirred the boiling porridge , for it began
to swell and fill the kettle . 

Larger and larger , it grew , and it grew , and it grew . 

Greedy Fawn was so frightened he did not know what to do . 

"Oh , will it never stop swelling ? " he thought . Harder and harder he
stirred to keep the porridge from boiling over . Beads of perspiration
ran down his little bronze face , yet still he stirred . He dared not
stop . 

Then he remembered that sometimes his mother would rap the kettle with
the porridge stick , if it became too full . 

Rap , rap , rap , went the porridge stick on the edge of the kettle . 
Instantly the _kettle_ began to swell . Larger , and larger , and larger it
grew . Greedy Fawn was so frightened he did not know what to do . 

Now Greedy Fawn could not reach across the kettle , to stir the porridge
with his stick , so he began to run around it . And around , and around , 
and around the kettle he ran , stirring , and stirring , and stirring . 

At last the kettle was so large that it nearly filled the wigwam . There
was just space enough left for Greedy Fawn to run around it . And around , 
and around , and around the kettle he ran , stirring , and stirring , and
stirring . 

Oh , how his little arms ached ! And , oh , how tired his small legs were ! 
But still he ran . He dared not stop . 

Here was porridge enough to last a small boy a lifetime , and he could
not stop to taste one mouthful ! 


At last Greedy Fawn could run no longer . He stumbled and fell by the
side of the kettle . He was too weak to rise . The stick fell from his
hand , and the porridge boiled on . Higher , and higher , and higher it
rose , until it ran over and down the sides of the kettle . Closer , and
closer the boiling porridge crept to the little Indian boy , and soon
Greedy Fawn and his stick were nearly buried in porridge . 

For once Greedy Fawn had all the porridge he wanted . And never again
would he have wanted anything , had not Deerheart and Sky Elk heard his
cries , and come running like deer up the trail to save him . 



