In the Valley of _Humiliation_, poor _Christian_ was
hard put to it; for he had gone but a little way, before he espied
a foul _Fiend_ coming over the field to meet him; his name is
_Apollyon_. Then did _Christian_ begin to be afraid, and
to cast in his mind whether to go back or to stand his ground: But
he considered again that he had no Armour for his back, and
therefore thought that to turn the back to him might give him the
greater advantage with ease to pierce him with his Darts.
Therefore he resolved to venture and stand his ground; For,
thought he, had I no more in mine eye than the saving of my life,
'twould be the best way to stand.

So he went on, and _Apollyon_ met him. Now the Monster was
hideous to behold; he was cloathed with scales like a Fish (and
they are his pride); he had wings like a Dragon, feet like a Bear,
and out of his belly came Fire and Smoke; and his mouth was as the
mouth of a Lion. When he was come up to _Christian_, he
beheld him with a disdainful countenance, and thus began to
question with him.

APOL. Whence come you? and whither are you bound?

CHR. I am come from the City of _Destruction_, which is the
place of all evil, and am going to the City of _Zion_.

APOL. By this I perceive thou art one of my Subjects, for all that
country is mine, and I am the Prince and God of it. How is it then
that thou hast run away from the King? Were it not that I hope
thou mayest do me more service, I would strike thee now at one
blow to the ground.

CHR. I was born indeed in your dominions, but your service was
hard, and your wages such as a man could not live on, _for the
wages of sin is death_; therefore when I was come to years, I
did as other considerate persons do, look out, if perhaps I might
find something better.

APOL. There is no Prince that will thus lightly lose his Subjects,
neither will I as yet lose thee: but since thou complainest of thy
service and wages, be content to go back; what our country will
afford, I do here promise to give thee.

CHR. But I have let myself to another, even to the King of
Princes, and how can I with fairness go back with thee?

APOL. Thou hast done in this, according to the Proverb, changed a
bad for a worse; but it is ordinary for those that have professed
themselves his Servants, after a while to give him the slip, and
return again to me: Do thou so too, and all shall be well.

CHR. I have given him my faith, and sworn my allegiance to him;
how then can I go back from this, and not be hanged as a Traitor?

APOL. Thou didst the same to me, and yet I am willing to pass by
all, if now thou wilt yet turn again and go back.

CHR. What I promised thee was in my non-age; and besides, I count
that the Prince under whose Banner now I stand is able to absolve
me; yea, and to pardon also what I did as to my compliance with
thee; and besides, O thou destroying _Apollyon_, to speak
truth, I like his Service, his Wages, his Servants, his
Government, his Company and Country, better than thine; and
therefore leave off to persuade me further; I am his Servant, and
I will follow him.

APOL. Consider again when thou art in cool blood, what thou art
like to meet with in the way that thou goest. Thou knowest that
for the most part, his Servants come to an ill end, because they
are transgressors against me and my ways: How many of them have
been put to shameful deaths; and besides, thou countest his
service better than mine, whereas he never came yet from the place
where he is to deliver any that served him out of our hands; but
as for me, how many times, as all the World very well knows, have
I delivered, either by power or fraud, those that have faithfully
served me, from him and his, though taken by them; and so I will
deliver thee.

CHR. His forbearing at present to deliver them is on purpose to
try their love, whether they will cleave to him to the end; and as
for the ill end thou sayest they come to, that is most glorious in
their account; for present deliverance, they do not much
expect it, for they stay for their Glory, and then they shall have
it, when their Prince comes in his and the Glory of the Angels.

APOL. Thou hast already been unfaithful in thy service to him, and
how dost thou think to receive wages of him?

CHR. Wherein, O _Apollyon_, have I been unfaithful to him?

APOL. Thou didst faint at first setting out, when thou wast almost
choked in the Gulf of _Dispond_; thou didst attempt wrong
ways to be rid of thy Burden, whereas thou shouldest have stayed
till thy Prince had taken it off; thou didst sinfully sleep and
lose thy choice thing; thou wast also almost persuaded to go back,
at the sight of the Lions; and when thou talkest of thy Journey,
and of what thou hast heard and seen, thou art inwardly desirous
of vain-glory in all that thou sayest or doest.

CHR. All this is true, and much more which thou hast left out; but
the Prince whom I serve and honor is merciful, and ready to
forgive; but besides, these infirmities possessed me in thy
Country, for there I sucked them in, and I have groaned under
them, been sorry for them, and have obtained Pardon of my Prince.

APOL. Then _Apollyon_ broke out into a grievous rage, saying,
I am an enemy to this Prince; I hate his Person, his Laws, and
People; I am come out on purpose to withstand thee.

CHR. _Apollyon_, beware what you do, for I am in the King's
High-way, the way of Holiness, therefore take heed to yourself.

APOL. Then _Apollyon_ straddled quite over the whole breadth
of the way, and said, I am void of fear in this matter; prepare
thyself to die; for I swear by my infernal Den, that thou shalt go
no further; here will I spill thy soul.

And with that he threw a flaming Dart at his breast, but
_Christian_ had a Shield in his hand, with which he caught
it, and so prevented the danger of that.

Then did _Christian_ draw, for he saw 'twas time to bestir
him: and _Apollyon_ as fast made at him, throwing Darts as
thick as Hail; by the which, notwithstanding all that _Christian_
could do to avoid it, _Apollyon_ wounded him in his _head,_
his _hand,_ and _foot:_ This made _Christian_ give a little
back; _Apollyon_ therefore followed his work amain, and
_Christian_ again took courage, and resisted as manfully
as he could. This sore Combat lasted for above half a day,
even till _Christian_ was almost quite spent; for you must
know that _Christian,_ by reason of his wounds, must needs
grow weaker and weaker.

Then _Apollyon_ espying his opportunity, began to gather up
close to _Christian,_ and wrestling with him, gave him a
dreadful fall; and with that _Christian's_ Sword flew out of
his hand. Then said _Apollyon, I am sure of thee now:_ and
with that he had almost pressed him to death, so that _Christian_
began to despair of life: but as God would have it, while
_Apollyon_ was fetching of his last blow, thereby to make
a full end of this good man, _Christian_ nimbly stretched
out his hand for his Sword, and caught it, saying, _Rejoice
not against me, O mine Enemy! when I fall I shall arise;_
and with that gave him a deadly thrust, which made him give
back, as one that had received his mortal wound: _Christian,_
perceiving that, made at him again, saying, _Nay, in all
these things we are more than Conquerors through him that
loved us._ And with that _Apollyon_ spread forth his Dragon's
wings, and sped him away, that _Christian_ for a season
saw him no more.

In this Combat no man can imagine, unless he had seen and heard as
I did, what yelling and hideous roaring _Apollyon_ made all
the time of the fight, he spake like a Dragon; and on the other
side, what sighs and groans burst from _Christian's_ heart. I
never saw him all the while give so much as one pleasant look,
till he perceived he had wounded _Apollyon_ with his two-
edged Sword; then indeed he did smile, and look upward; but 'twas
the dreadfullest sight that ever I saw.

So when the Battle was over, _Christian_ said, I will here
give thanks to him that hath delivered me out of the mouth of the
Lion, to him that did help me against _Apollyon_. And so he
did, saying, Great _Beelzebub_, the Captain of this Fiend,
Design'd my ruin; therefore to this end He sent him harness'd out:
and he with rage That hellish was, did fiercely me engage: But
blessed _Michael_ helped me, and I By dint of Sword did
quickly make him fly. Therefore to him let me give lasting praise,
And thank and bless his holy name always. Then there came to him a
hand, with some of the leaves of the Tree of Life, the which
_Christian_ took, and applied to the wounds that he had
received in the Battle, and was healed immediately. He also sat
down in that place to eat Bread, and to drink of the Bottle that
was given him a little before; so being refreshed, he addressed
himself to his Journey, with his Sword drawn in his hand; for he
said, I know not but some other Enemy may be at hand. But he met
with no other affront from _Apollyon_ quite through this
Valley.




CHRISTIAN AND HOPEFUL ARE CAPTIVES IN DOUBTING CASTLE

By John Bunyan


I saw then that they went on their way to a pleasant River, which
_David_ the King called the _River of God_, but _John_, _the
River of the Water of Life_. Now their way lay just upon
the bank of the River; here therefore _Christian_ and his
Companion walked with great delight; they drank also of the
water of the River, which was pleasant and enlivening to
their weary spirits; besides, on the banks of this River on
either side were _green Trees_, that bore all manner of Fruit;
and the Leaves of the Trees were good for Medicine; with
the Fruit of these Trees they were also much delighted; and the
Leaves they ate to prevent Surfeits, and other Diseases that are
incident to those that heat their blood by Travels. On either side
of the River was also a Meadow, curiously beautified with Lilies;
and it was green all the year long. In this Meadow they lay down
and slept, for here they might _lie down safely._ When they
awoke, they gathered again of the Fruit of the Trees, and drank
again of the water of the River, and then lay down again to sleep.
Thus they did several days and nights, and when they were
disposed to go on they eat and drank, and departed.

Now I beheld in my Dream, that they had not journeyed far, but the
River and the way for a time parted; at which they were not a
little sorry, yet they durst not go out of the way. Now the way
from the River was rough, and their feet tender by reason of their
Travels; _so the soul of the Pilgrims was much discouraged
because of the way._ Now a little before them, there was on the
left hand of the road a _Meadow_, and a Stile to go over into
it, and that Meadow is called _By-path-Meadow_. Then said
_Christian_ to his fellow, If this Meadow lieth along by our
way-side, let's go over into it. Then he went to the Stile to see,
and behold a Path lay along by the way on the other side of the
fence. 'Tis according to my wish, said _Christian_, here is
the easiest going; come good Hopeful, and let us go over.

HOPE. But how if this Path should lead us out of the way?

CHR. That's not like, said the other; look, doth it not go along
by the way-side? So _Hopeful_, being persuaded by his fellow,
went after him over the Stile. When they were gone over, and were
got into the Path, they found it very easy for their feet: and
withal, they looking before them, espied a man walking as they
did, (and his name was _Vain-confidence_) so they called
after him, and asked him whither that way led? He said, To the
Coelestial Gate. Look, said _Christian_, did I not tell you
so? by this you may see we are right. So they followed, and he
went before them. But behold the night came on, and it grew very
dark, so that they that were behind lost the sight of him that
went before.

He therefore that went before (_Vain-confidence_ by name) not
seeing the way before him, fell into a deep Pit, which was on
purpose there made by the Prince of those grounds, to catch
_vain-glorious_ fools withal, and was dashed in pieces with
his fall.

Now _Christian_ and his fellow heard him fall. So they called
to know the matter, but there was none to answer, only they heard
a groaning. Then said _Hopeful_, Where are we now? Then was
his fellow silent, as mistrusting that he had led him out of the
way; and now it began to rain, and thunder, and lighten in a very
dreadful manner, and the water rose amain.

Then _Hopeful_ groaned in himself, saying, _Oh that I had
kept on my way!_

CHR. Who could have thought that this Path should have led us out
of the way?

HOPE. I was afraid on't at the very first, and therefore gave you
that gentle caution. I would have spoken plainer, but that you are
older than I.

CHR. Good Brother be not offended; I am sorry I have brought thee
out of the way, and that I have put thee into such imminent
danger; pray my Brother forgive me, I did not do it of an evil
intent.

HOPE. Be comforted my brother, for I forgive thee; and believe too
that this shall be for our good,

CHR. I am glad I have with me a merciful Brother; but we must not
stand thus, let's try to go back again.

HOPE. But good Brother let me go before.

CHE. No, if you please, let me go first, that if there be any
danger, I may be first therein, because by my means we are both
gone out of the way.

HOPE. No, said Hopeful, you shall not go first; for your mind
being troubled may lead you out of the way again. Then for their
encouragement, they heard the voice of one saying, _Let thine
heart be towards the High-way, even the way that thou wentest,
turn again._ But by this time the waters were greatly risen; by
reason of which the way of going back was very dangerous. (Then I
thought that it is easier going out of the way when we are in,
than going in when we are out.) Yet they adventured to go back;
but it was so dark, and the flood was so high, that in their going
back they had like to have been drowned nine or ten times.

Neither could they, with all the skill they had, get again to the
Stile that night. Wherefore at last, lighting under a little
shelter, they sat down there till the day brake; but being weary,
they fell asleep. Now there was not far from the place where they
lay, a Castle called _Doubting Castle_, the owner whereof was
Giant _Despair_, and it was in his grounds they were now
sleeping: wherefore he, getting up in the morning early, and
walking up and down in his fields, caught _Christian_ and
_Hopeful_ asleep in his grounds. Then with a _grim_ and
_surly_ voice he bid them awake, and asked them whence they
were? and what they did in his grounds? They told him they were
Pilgrims, and that they had lost their way. Then said the Giant,
You have this night trespassed on me, by trampling in and lying on
my grounds, and therefore you must go along with me. So they were
forced to go, because he was stronger than they. They also had but
little to say, for they knew themselves in a fault. The Giant
therefore drove them before him, and put them into his Castle,
into a very dark Dungeon, nasty and stinking to the spirits of
these two men. Here then they lay from _Wednesday_ morning
till _Saturday_ night, without one bit of bread, or drop of
drink, or light, or any to ask how they did; they were therefore
here in evil case, and were far from friends and acquaintance. Now
in this place _Christian_ had double sorrow, because 'twas
through his unadvised haste that they were brought into this
distress.

Now Giant _Despair_ had a Wife, and her name was
_Diffidence_. So when he was gone to bed, he told his Wife
what he had done, to wit, that he had taken a couple of Prisoners
and cast them into his Dungeon, for trespassing on his grounds.
Then he asked her also what he had best do further to them. So she
asked him what they were, whence they came, and whither they were
bound; and he told her. Then she counselled him that when he arose
in the morning he should beat them without any mercy. So when he
arose, he getteth him a grievous Crab-tree Cudgel, and goes down
into the Dungeon to them, and there first falls to rating of them,
as if they were dogs, although they gave him never a word of
distaste. Then he falls upon them, and beats them fearfully, in
such sort, that they were not able to help themselves, or to turn
them upon the floor. This done, he withdraws and leaves them,
there to condole their misery, and to mourn under their
distress: so all that day they spent the time in nothing but
sighs and bitter lamentations. The next night she talking
with her Husband about them further, and understanding that
they were yet alive, did advise him to counsel them to make away
themselves. So when morning was come, he goes to them in a
surly manner as before, and perceiving them to be very sore with
the stripes that he had given them the day before, he told them,
that since they were never like to come out of that place, their
only way would be forthwith to make an end of themselves, either
with Knife, Halter, or Poison; For why, said he, should you chuse
life, seeing it is attended with so much bitterness? But they
desired him to let them go. With that he looked ugly upon them,
and rushing to them had doubtless made an end of them himself, but
that he fell into one of his Fits, (for he sometimes in Sun-shine
weather fell into Fits) and lost for a time the use of his hand;
wherefore he withdrew, and left them as before, to consider what
to do. Then did the Prisoners consult between themselves, whether
'twas best to take his counsel or no; and thus they began to
discourse:

CHR. Brother, said _Christian_, what shall we do? The life
that we now live is miserable: for my part I know not whether is
best, to live thus, or to die out of hand. _My soul chuseth
strangling rather than life,_ and the Grave is more easy for me
than this Dungeon. Shall we be ruled by the Giant?

HOPE. Indeed our present condition is dreadful, and death would be
far more welcome to me than _thus_ for ever to abide; but yet
let us consider, the Lord of the Country to which we are going
hath said, Thou shalt do no murder, no not to another man's
person; much more then are we forbidden to take his counsel to
kill ourselves. And let us consider again, that all the Law is not
in the hand of Giant _Despair_. Others, so far as I can
understand, have been taken by him as well as we, and yet have
escaped out of his hand. Who knows but that God that made the
world may cause that Giant _Despair_ may die? or that at some
time or other he may forget to lock us in? or but he may in short
time have another of his Fits before us, and may lose the use of
his limbs? and if ever that should come to pass again, for my part
I am resolved to pluck up the heart of a man, and to try my utmost
to get from under his hand. I was a fool that I did not try to do
it before; but however, my Brother, let's be patient, and endure a
while; the time may come that may give us a happy release; but let
us not be our own murderers. With these words _Hopeful_ at
present did moderate the mind of his Brother; so they continued
together (in the dark) that day, in their sad and doleful
condition.

Well, towards evening the Giant goes down into the Dungeon again,
to see if his prisoners had taken his counsel; but when he came
there he found them alive, and truly, alive was all; for now, what
for want of Bread and Water, and by reason of the Wounds they
received when he beat them, they could do little but breathe: But,
I say, he found them alive; at which he fell into a grievous rage,
and told them that seeing they disobeyed his counsel, it should be
worse with them than if they had never been born.

At this they trembled greatly, and I think that _Christian_
fell into a Swoon; but coming a little to himself again, they
renewed their discourse about the Giant's counsel, and whether yet
they had best to take it or no. Now _Christian_ again seemed
to be for doing it, but _Hopeful_ made his second reply as
followeth:

HOPE. My Brother, said he, rememberest thou not how valiant thou
hast been heretofore? _Apollyon_ could not crush thee, nor
could all that thou didst hear, or see, or feel in the Valley of
the _Shadow of Death_. What hardship, terror, and amazement
hast thou already gone through, and art thou now nothing but fear?
Thou seest that I am in the Dungeon with thee, a far weaker man by
nature than thou art; also this Giant has wounded me as well as
thee, and hath also cut off the Bread and Water from my mouth; and
with thee I mourn without the light. But let's exercise a little
more patience, remember how thou playedst the man at Vanity Fair,
and wast neither afraid of the Chain, nor Cage, nor yet of bloody
Death: wherefore let us (at least to avoid the shame that becomes
not a Christian to be found in) bear up with patience as well as
we can.

Now night being come again, and the Giant and his Wife being in
bed, she asked him concerning the Prisoners, and if they had taken
his counsel: To which he replied, They are sturdy Rogues, they
chuse rather to bear all hardship, than to make away themselves.
Then said she, Take them into the Castle-yard to-morrow, and shew
them the Bones and Skulls of those that thou hast already
dispatch'd, and make them believe, e'er a week comes to an end,
thou also wilt tear them in pieces, as thou hast done their
fellows before them.

So when the morning was come, the Giant goes to them again, and
takes them into the Castle-yard and shews them as his Wife had
bidden him. These, said he, were Pilgrims as you are, once, and
they trespassed in my grounds, as you have done; and when I
thought fit, I tore them in pieces, and so within ten days I will
do you. Go get you down to your Den again; and with that he beat
them all the way thither. They lay therefore all day on
_Saturday_ in a lamentable case, as before. Now when night
was come, and when Mrs. Diffidence and her Husband the Giant were
got to bed, they began to renew their discourse of their
Prisoners; and withal the old Giant wondered, that he could
neither by his blows nor counsel bring them to an end. And with
that his Wife replied, I fear, said she, that they live in hope
that some will come to relieve them, or that they have pick-locks
about them, by the means of which they hope to escape. And sayest
thou so, my dear? said the Giant, I will therefore search them in
the morning.

Well on _Saturday_ about midnight they began to _pray_,
and continued in Prayer till almost break of day.

Now a little before it was day, good _Christian_, as one half
amazed, brake out in passionate speech: _What a fool_, quoth
he, _am I, thus to lie in a stinking Dungeon, when I may as well
walk at liberty. I_ have a Key in my bosom called Promise, that
will, I am persuaded, open any Lock in _Doubting_ Castle.
Then said _Hopeful_, That's good news; good Brother, pluck it
out of thy bosom and try.

Then _Christian_ pulled it out of his bosom, and began to try
at the Dungeon door, whose bolt (as he turned the Key) gave back,
and the door flew open with ease, and _Christian_ and _Hopeful_
both came out. Then he went to the outward door that leads
into the Castle-yard, and with his Key opened that door also.
After he went to the iron Gate, for that must be opened too,
but that Lock went damnable hard, yet the Key did open it. Then
they thrust open the Gate to make their escape with speed; but
that Gate as it opened made such a creaking, that it waked Giant
_Despair_, who hastily rising to pursue his Prisoners, felt
his limbs to fail, for his Fits took him again, so that he could
by no means go after them. Then they went on, and came to the
King's High-way again, and so were safe, because they were out of
his jurisdiction.

Now when they were gone over the Stile, they began to contrive
with themselves what they should do at that Stile, to prevent
those that should come after from falling into the hands of Giant
_Despair_. So they consented to erect there a Pillar, and to
engrave upon the side thereof this sentence, _Over this Stile is
the way to_ Doubting _Castle, which is kept by Giant_ Despair,
_who despiseth the King of the Coelestial Country, and seeks
to destroy his holy Pilgrims._ Many therefore that followed
after read what was written, and escaped the danger. This
done, they sang as follows:

 Out of the way we went, and then we found
 What 'twas to tread upon forbidden ground;
 And let them that come after have a care,
 Lest heedlessness makes them, as we, to fare.
 Lest they for trespassing his prisoners are,
 Whose Castle's _Doubting, and whose name's Despair_.




CHRISTIAN AND HOPEFUL ARRIVE AT THE CAELESTIAL CITY

By John Bunyan


I saw that as they went on, there met them two men, in Raiment
that shone like Gold, also their faces shone as the light.

These men asked the Pilgrims whence they came? and they told them.
They also asked them where they had lodged, what difficulties and
dangers, what comforts and pleasures they had met in the way? and
they told them. Then said the men that met them, You have but two
difficulties more to meet with, and then you are in the City.

And I slept, and Dreamed again, and saw the same two Pilgrims
going down the Mountains along the High-way towards the City.

Now you must note that the City stood upon a mighty Hill, but the
Pilgrims went up that Hill with ease because they had these two
men to lead them up by the arms; also they had left their
_mortal Garments_ behind them in the River. They therefore
went up here with much agility and speed, though the foundation
upon which the City was framed was higher than the Clouds. They
therefore went up through the Regions of the Air, sweetly talking
as they went, being comforted, because they safely got over the
River, and had such glorious Companions to attend them.

The talk that they had with the Shining Ones was about the glory
of the place, who told them that the beauty and glory of it was
inexpressible. There, said they, is the Mount _Sion_, the
heavenly _Jerusalem_, the innumerable company of Angels, and
the Spirits of just men made perfect. You are going now, said
they, to the Paradise of God, wherein you shall see the Tree of
Life, and eat of the never-fading fruits thereof; and when you
come there, you shall have white Robes given you, and your walk
and talk shall be every day with the King, even all the days of
Eternity. There you shall not see again such things as you saw
when you were in the lower Region upon the earth, to wit, sorrow,
sickness, affliction, and health, _for the former things are
passed away_. You are now going to _Abraham_, to _Isaac_,
and _Jacob_, and to the Prophets, men that God hath taken
away from the evil to come, and that are now resting upon
their beds, each one walking in his righteousness. The men
then asked, What must we do in the holy place? To whom it was
answered, You must there receive the comfort of all your toil, and
have joy for all your sorrow; you must reap what you have sown,
even the fruit of all your Prayers and Tears, and sufferings for
the King by the way. In that place you must wear Crowns of Gold,
and enjoy the perpetual sight and vision of the Holy One, _for
there you shall see him as he is_. There also you shall serve
him continually with praise, with shouting, and thanksgiving, whom
you desired to serve in the World, though with much difficulty,
because of the infirmity of your flesh. There your eyes shall be
delighted with seeing, and your ears with hearing the pleasant
voice of the Mighty One. There you shall enjoy your friends again,
that are gone thither before you; and there you shall with joy
receive even every one that follows into the holy place after you.
There also shall you be cloathed with Glory and Majesty, and put
into an equipage fit to ride out with the King of Glory. When he
shall come with sound of Trumpet in the Clouds, as upon the wings
of the Wind, you shall come with him; and when he shall sit upon
the Throne of Judgment, you shall sit by him; yea, and when he
shall pass sentence upon all the workers of iniquity, let them be
Angels or Men, you also shall have a voice in that Judgment,
because they were his and your Enemies. Also when he shall again
return to the City, you shall go too, with sound of Trumpet, and
be ever with him.

Now while they were thus drawing towards the Gate, behold a
company of the Heavenly Host came out to meet them; to whom it was
said by the other two Shining Ones, These are the men that have
loved our Lord when they were in the World, and that have left all
for his Holy Name, and he hath sent us to fetch them, and we have
brought them thus far on their desired Journey, that they may go
in and look their Redeemer in the face with joy. Then the Heavenly
Host gave a great shout, saying, _Blessed are they that are
called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb._ There came out also
at this time to meet them, several of the King's Trumpeters,
cloathed in white and shining Raiment, who with melodious noises
and loud, made even the Heavens to echo with their sound. These
Trumpeters saluted _Christian_ and his fellow with ten thousand
welcomes from the World, and this they did with shouting and sound
of Trumpet.

This done, they compassed them round on every side; some went
before, some behind, and some on the right hand, some on the left,
(as 'twere to guard them through the upper Regions) continually
sounding as they went with melodious noise, in notes on high: so
that the very sight was to them that could behold it, as if Heaven
itself was come down to meet them. Thus therefore they walked on
together; and as they walked, ever and anon these Trumpeters, even
with joyful sound, would, by mixing their musick with looks and
gestures, still signify to _Christian_ and his Brother, how
welcome they were into their company, and with what gladness they
came to meet them; and now were these two men as 'twere in Heaven
before they came at it, being swallowed up with the sight of
Angels, and with hearing of their melodious notes. Here also they
had the City itself in view, and they thought they heard all the
Bells therein ring to welcome them thereto. But above all, the
warm and joyful thoughts that they had about their own dwelling
there, with such company, and that for ever and ever. Oh, by what
tongue or pen can their glorious joy be expressed! And thus they
came up to the Gate.

Now when they were come up to the Gate, there was written over it
in Letters of Gold, _Blessed are they that do his Commandments,
that they may have right to the Tree of Life, and may enter in
through the Gates into the City_.

Then I saw in my Dream, that the Shining Men bid them call at the
Gate; the which when they did, some from above looked over the
Gate, to wit, _Enoch_, _Moses_, and _Elijah_, _&c_., to whom
it was said, These Pilgrims are come from the City of _Destruction_
for the love that they bear to the King of this place; and
then the Pilgrims gave in unto them each man his Certificate,
which they had received in the beginning; those therefore
were carried in to the King, who when he had read them, said,
Where are the men? To whom it was answered, They are standing
without the Gate. The King then commanded to open the Gate,
_That the righteous nation_, saith he, _that keepeth Truth may enter in_.

Now I saw in my Dream that these two men went in at the Gate: and
lo, as they entered, they were transfigured, and they had Raiment
put on that shone like Gold. There was also that met them with
Harps and Crowns, and gave them to them, the Harps to praise
withal, and the Crowns in token of honour. Then I heard in my
Dream that all the Bells in the City rang again for joy, and that
it was said unto them, _Enter ye into the joy of your Lord_.
I also heard the men themselves, that they sang with a loud
voice, saying, _Blessing, Honour, Glory, and Power, be to him
that sitteth upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and
ever_.

Now just as the Gates were opened to let in the men, I looked in
after them, and behold, the City shone like the Sun; the Streets
also were paved with Gold, and in them walked many men, with
Crowns on their heads, Palms in their hands, and golden Harps to
sing praises withal.

There were also of them that had wings, and they answered one
another without intermission, saying, _Holy, Holy, Holy, is the
Lord_. And after that they shut up the Gates. Which when I had
seen, I wished myself among them.

Now while I was gazing upon all these things, I turned my head to
look back, and saw Ignorance come up to the River-side; but he
soon got over, and that without half that difficulty which the
other two men met with. For it happened that there was then in
that place one Vain-hope a Ferry-man, that with his Boat helped
him over; so he, as the other I saw, did ascend the Hill to come
up to the Gate, only he came alone; neither did any man meet him
with the least encouragement. When he was come up to the Gate, he
looked up to the writing that was above, and then began to knock,
supposing that entrance should have been quickly administered to
him; but he was asked by the men that looked over the top of the
Gate, Whence came you? and what would you have? He answered, I
have eat and drank in the presence of the King, and he has taught
in our Streets. Then they asked him for his Certificate, that
they might go in and shew it to the King. So he fumbled in his
bosom for one, and found none. Then said they, Have you none? But
the man answered never a word. So they told the King, but he would
not come down to see him, but commanded the two Shining Ones that
conducted _Christian_ and _Hopeful_ to the City, to go out
and take _Ignorance_, and bind him hand and foot, and have
him away. Then they took him up, and carried him through the
air to the door that I saw in the side of the Hill, and put him in
there. Then I saw that there was a way to Hell even from the Gates
of Heaven, as well as from the City of _Destruction_. So I
awoke, and behold it was a Dream.




