Long years ago, there ruled over Britain a King called Uther
Pendragon. A mighty prince was he, and feared by all men; yet, when
he sought the love of the fair Igraine of Cornwall, she would have
naught to do with him, so that, from grief and disappointment, Uther
fell sick, and at last seemed like to die.

Now in those days, there lived a famous magician named Merlin, so
powerful that he could change his form at will, or even make himself
invisible; nor was there any place so remote but that he could reach
it at once, merely by wishing himself there. One day, suddenly he
stood at Uther's bedside, and said: "Sir King, I know thy grief, and
am ready to help thee. Only promise to give me, at his birth, the
son that shall be born to thee, and thou shalt have thy heart's
desire." To this the King agreed joyfully, and Merlin kept his word:
for he gave Uther the form of one whom Igraine had loved dearly, and
so she took him willingly for her husband.

When the time had come that a child should be born to the King and
Queen, Merlin appeared before Uther to remind him of his promise;
and Uther swore it should be as he had said. Three days later, a
prince was born and, with pomp and ceremony, was christened by the
name of Arthur; but immediately thereafter, the King commanded that
the child should be carried to the postern-gate, there to be given
to the old man who would be found waiting without.

Not long after, Uther fell sick, and he knew that his end was come;
so, by Merlin's advice; he called together his knights and barons,
and said to them: "My death draws near. I charge you, therefore,
that ye obey my son even as ye have obeyed me; and my curse upon him
if he claim not the crown when he is a man grown." Then the King
turned his face to the wall and died.

Scarcely was Uther laid in his grave before disputes arose. Few of
the nobles had seen Arthur or even heard of him, and not one of them
would have been willing to be ruled by a child; rather, each thought
himself fitted to be King, and, strengthening his own castle, made
war on his neighbours until confusion alone was supreme and the poor
groaned because there was none to help them.

Now when Merlin carried away Arthur--for Merlin was the old man who
had stood at the postern-gate--he had known all that would happen,
and had taken the child to keep him safe from the fierce barons
until he should be of age to rule wisely and well, and perform all
the wonders prophesied of him. He gave the child to the care of the
good knight Sir Ector to bring up with his son Kay, but revealed not
to him that it was the son of Uther Pendragon that was given into
his charge.

At last, when years had passed and Arthur was grown a tall youth
well skilled in knightly exercises, Merlin went to the Archbishop of
Canterbury and advised him that he should call together at
Christmas-time all the chief men of the realm to the great cathedral
in London; "For," said Merlin, "there shall be seen a great marvel
by which it shall be made clear to all men who is the lawful King of
this land." The Archbishop did as Merlin counselled. Under pain of a
fearful curse, he bade barons and knights come to London to keep the
feast, and to pray heaven to send peace to the realm.

The people hastened to obey the Archbishop's commands, and, from all
sides, barons and knights came riding in to keep the birth-feast of
our Lord. And when they had prayed, and were coming forth from the
cathedral, they saw a strange sight. There, in the open space before
the church, stood, on a great stone, an anvil thrust through with a
sword; and on the stone were written these words: "Whoso can draw
forth this sword, is rightful King of Britain born.
At once there were fierce quarrels, each man clamouring to be the
first to try his fortune, none doubting his own success. Then the
Archbishop decreed that each should make the venture in turn, from
the greatest baron to the least knight, and each in turn, having put
forth his utmost strength, failed to move the sword one inch, and
drew back ashamed. So the Archbishop dismissed the company, and
having appointed guards to watch over the stone, sent messengers
through all the land to give word of great jousts to be held in
London at Easter, when each knight could give proof of his skill and
courage, and try whether the adventure of the sword was for him.

Among those who rode to London at Easter was the good Sir Ector, and
with him his son, Sir Kay, newly made a knight, and the young
Arthur. When the morning came that the jousts should begin, Sir Kay
and Arthur mounted their horses and set out for the lists; but
before they reached the field, Kay looked and saw that he had left
his sword behind. Immediately Arthur turned back to fetch it for
him, only to find the house fast shut, for all were gone to view the
tournament. Sore vexed was Arthur, fearing lest his brother Kay
should lose his chance of gaining glory, till, of a sudden, he
bethought him of the sword in the great anvil before the cathedral.
Thither he rode with all speed, and the guards having deserted their
post to view the tournament, there was none to forbid him the
adventure. He leapt from his horse, seized the hilt, and instantly
drew forth the sword as easily as from a scabbard; then, mounting
his horse and thinking no marvel of what he had done, he rode after
his brother and handed him the weapon.

When Kay looked at it, he saw at once that it was the wondrous sword
from the stone. In great joy he sought his father, and showing it to
him, said: "Then must I be King of Britain." But Sir Ector bade him
say how he came by the sword, and when Sir Kay told how Arthur had
brought it to him, Sir Ector bent his knee to the boy, and said:
"Sir, I perceive that ye are my King, and here I tender you my
homage"; and Kay did as his father. Then the three sought the
Archbishop, to whom they related all that had happened; and he, much
marvelling, called the people together to the great stone, and bade
Arthur thrust back the sword and draw it forth again in the presence
of all, which he did with ease. But an angry murmur arose from the
barons, who cried that what a boy could do, a man could do; so, at
the Archbishop's word, the sword was put back, and each man, whether
baron or knight, tried in his turn to draw it forth, and failed.
Then, for the third time, Arthur drew forth the sword. Immediately
there arose from the people a great shout: "Arthur is King! Arthur
is King! We will have no King but Arthur"; and, though the great
barons scowled and threatened, they fell on their knees before him
while the Archbishop placed the crown upon his head, and swore to
obey him faithfully as their lord and sovereign.

Thus Arthur was made King; and to all he did justice, righting
wrongs and giving to all their dues. Nor was he forgetful of those
that had been his friends; for Kay, whom he loved as a brother, he
made Seneschal and chief of his household, and to Sir Ector, his
foster father, he gave broad lands.

Thus Arthur was made King, but he had to fight for his own; for
eleven great kings drew together and refused to acknowledge him as
their lord, and chief amongst the rebels was King Lot of Orknev who
had married Arthur's sister, Bellicent.

By Merlin's advice, Arthur sent for help overseas, to Ban and Bors,
the two great Kings who ruled in Gaul. With their aid, he overthrew
his foes in a great battle near the river Trent; and then he passed
with them into their own lands and helped them drive out their
enemies. So there was ever great friendship between Arthur and the
Kings Ban and Bors, and all their kindred; and afterward some of the
most famous Knights of the Round Table were of that kin.

Then King Arthur set himself to restore order throughout his
kingdom. To all who would submit and amend their evil ways, he
showed kindness; but those who persisted in oppression and wrong he
removed, putting in their places others who would deal justly with
the people. And because the land had become overrun with forest
during the days of misrule, he cut roads through the thickets, that
no longer wild beasts and men, fiercer than the beasts, should lurk
in their gloom, to the harm of the weak and defenceless. Thus it
came to pass that soon the peasant ploughed his fields in safety,
and where had been wastes, men dwelt again in peace and prosperity.

Amongst the lesser Kings whom Arthur helped to rebuild their towns
and restore order, was King Leodegrance of Cameliard. Now
Leodegrance had one fair child, his daughter Guenevere; and from the
time that first he saw her, Arthur gave her all his love. So he
sought counsel of Merlin, his chief adviser. Merlin heard the King
sorrowfully, and he said: "Sir King, when a man's heart is set, he
may not change. Yet had it been well if ye had loved another.
So the King sent his knights to Leodegrance, to ask of him his
daughter; and Leodegrance consented, rejoicing to wed her to so good
and knightly a King. With great pomp, the princess was conducted to
Canterbury, and there the King met her, and they two were wed by the
Archbishop in the great Cathedral, amid the rejoicings of the
people.

On that same day did Arthur found his Order of the Round Table, the
fame of which was to spread throughout Christendom and endure
through all time. Now the Round Table had been made for King Uther
Pendragon by Merlin, who had meant thereby to set forth plainly to
all men the roundness of the earth. After Uther died, King
Leodegrance had possessed it; but when Arthur was wed, he sent it to
him as a gift, and great was the King's joy at receiving it. One
hundred and fifty knights might take their places about it, and for
them Merlin made sieges, or seats. One hundred and twenty-eight did
Arthur knight at that great feast; thereafter, if any sieges were
empty, at the high festival of Pentecost new knights were ordained
to fill them, and by magic was the name of each knight found
inscribed, in letters of gold, in his proper siege. One seat only
long remained unoccupied, and that was the Siege Perilous. No knight
might occupy it until the coming of Sir Galahad; for, without danger
to his life, none might sit there who was not free from all stain of
sin.

With pomp and ceremony did each knight take upon him the vows of
true knighthood: to obey the King; to show mercy to all who asked
it; to defend the weak; and for no worldly gain to fight in a
wrongful cause: and all the knights rejoiced together, doing honour
to Arthur and to his Queen. Then they rode forth to right the wrong
and help the oppressed, and by their aid the King held his realm in
peace, doing justice to all.

Now, as time passed, King Arthur gathered into his Order of the
Round Table knights whose peers shall never be found in any age; and
foremost amongst them all was Sir Launcelot du Lac. Such was his
strength that none against whom he laid lance in rest could keep the
saddle, and no shield was proof against his sword dint; but for his
courtesy even more than for his courage and strength, Sir Launcelot
was famed far and near. Gentle he was and ever the first to rejoice
in the renown of another; and in the jousts, he would avoid
encounter with the young and untried knight, letting him pass to
gain glory if he might.

It would take a great book to record all the famous deeds of Sir
Launcelot, and all his adventures. He was of Gaul, for his father,
King Ban, ruled over Benwick; he was named Launcelot du Lac by the
Lady of the Lake who reared him when his mother died. Early he won
renown; then, when there was peace in his own land, he passed into
Britain, to Arthur's Court, where the King received him gladly, and
made him Knight of the Round Table and took him for his trustiest
friend. And so it was that, when Guenevere was to be brought to
Canterbury, to be married to the King, Launcelot was chief of the
knights sent to wait upon her, and of this came the sorrow of later
days. For, from the moment he saw her, Sir Launcelot loved
Guenevere, for her sake remaining wifeless all his days, and in all
things being her faithful knight. But busy-bodies and mischief-
makers spoke evil of Sir Launcelot and the Queen, and from their
talk came the undoing of the King and the downfall of his great
work. But that was after long years, and after many true knights had
lived their lives, honouring the King and Queen, and doing great
deeds.

Before Merlin passed from the world of men, he had uttered many
marvellous prophesies, and one that boded ill to King Arthur; for he
foretold that, in the days to come, a son of Arthur's sister should
stir up bitter war against the King, and at last a great battle
should be fought, when many a brave knight should find his doom.

Now, among the nephews of Arthur, was one most dishonourable; his
name was Mordred. No knightly deed had he ever done, and he hated to
hear the good report of others because he himself was a coward and
envious. But of all the Round Table there was none that Mordred
hated more than Sir Launcelot du Lac, whom all true knights held in
most honour; and not the less did Mordred hate Launcelot that he was
the knight whom Queen Guenevere had in most esteem. So, at last, his
jealous rage passing all bounds, he spoke evil of the Queen and of
Launcelot, saying that they were traitors to the King. Now Sir
Gawain and Sir Gareth, Mordred's brothers, refused to give ear to
these slanders, holding that Sir Launcelot, in his knightly service
of the Queen, did honour to King Arthur also; but by ill-fortune
another brother, Sir Agravaine, had ill-will to the Queen, and
professed to believe Mordred's evil tales. So the two went to King
Arthur with their ill stories.

Now when Arthur had heard them, he was wroth; for never would he
lightly believe evil of any, and Sir Launcelot was the knight whom
he loved above all others. Sternly then he bade them begone and come
no more to him with unproven tales against any, and, least of all,
against Sir Launcelot and their lady, the Queen.

The two departed, but in their hearts was hatred against Launcelot
and the Queen, more bitter than ever for the rebuke they had called
down upon themselves.

Great was the King's grief. Despite all that Mordred could say, he
was slow to doubt Sir Launcelot, whom he loved, but his mind was
filled with forebodings; and well he knew that their kin would seek
vengeance on Sir Launcelot, and the noble fellowship of the Round
Table be utterly destroyed.

All too soon it proved even as the King had feared. Many were found
to hold with Sir Mordred; some from envy of the honour and worship
of the noble Sir Launcelot; and among them even were those who dared
to raise their voice against the Queen herself, calling for judgment
upon her as leagued with a traitor against the King, and as having
caused the death of so many good knights. Now in those days the law
was that if any one were accused of treason by witnesses, or taken
in the act, that one should die the death by burning, be it man or
woman, knight or churl. So then the murmurs grew to a loud clamour
that the law should have its course, and that King Arthur should
pass sentence on the Queen. Then was the King's woe doubled; "For,said he, "I sit as King to be a rightful judge and keep all the law;
wherefore I may not do battle for my own Queen, and now there is
none other to help her." So a decree was issued that Queen Guenevere
should be burnt at the stake outside the walls of Carlisle.

Forthwith, King Arthur sent for his nephew, Sir Gawain, and said to
him: "Fair nephew, I give it in charge to you to see that all is
done as has been decreed." But Sir Gawain answered boldly: "Sir
King, never will I be present to see my lady the Queen die. It is of
ill counsel that ye have consented to her death." Then the King bade
Gawain send his two young brothers, Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris, to
receive his commands, and these he desired to attend the Queen to
the place of execution. So Gareth made answer for both: "My Lord the
King, we owe you obedience in all things, but know that it is sore
against our wills that we obey you in this; nor will we appear in
arms in the place where that noble lady shall die"; then sorrowfully
they mounted their horses and rode to Carlisle.

When the day appointed had come, the Queen was led forth to a place
without the walls of Carlisle, and there she was bound to the stake
to be burnt to death. Loud were her ladies' lamentations, and many a
lord was found to weep at that grievous sight of a Queen brought so
low; yet was there none who dared come forward as her champion, lest
he should be suspected of treason. As for Gareth and Gaheris, they
could not bear the sight and stood with their faces covered in their
mantles. Then, just as the torch was to be applied to the faggots,
there was a sound as of many horses galloping, and the next instant
a band of knights rushed upon the astonished throng, their leader
cutting down all who crossed his path until he had reached the
Queen, whom he lifted to his saddle and bore from the press. Then
all men knew that it was Sir Launcelot, come knightly to rescue the
Queen, and in their hearts they rejoiced. So with little hindrance
they rode away, Sir Launcelot and all his kin with the Queen in
their midst, till they came to the castle of the Joyous Garde where
they held the Queen in safety and all reverence.

At last Sir Launcelot desired of King Arthur assurance of liberty
for the Queen, as also safe conduct for himself and his knights,
that he might bring Dame Guenevere, with due honour, to the King at
Carlisle; and thereto the King pledged his word.

So Launcelot set forth with the Queen, and behind them rode a
hundred knights arrayed in green velvet, the housings of the horses
of the same all studded with precious stones; thus they passed
through the city of Carlisle, openly, in the sight of all, and there
were many who rejoiced that the Queen was come again and Sir
Launcelot with her, though they of Gawain's party scowled upon him.

When they were come into the great hall where Arthur sat, with Sir
Gawain and other great lords about him, Sir Launcelot led Guenevere
to the throne and both knelt before the King; then, rising, Sir
Launcelot lifted the Queen to her feet, and thus he spoke to King
Arthur, boldly and well before the whole court: "My lord, Sir
Arthur, I bring you here your Queen, than whom no truer nor nobler
lady ever lived; and here stand I, Sir Launcelot du Lac, ready to do
battle with any that dare gainsay it"; and with these words Sir
Launcelot turned and looked upon the lords and knights present in
their places, but none would challenge him in that cause, not even
Sir Gawain, for he had ever affirmed that Dame Guenevere was a true
and honourable lady.

Then Sir Launcelot spoke again; "Now, my Lord Arthur, in my own
defence it behooves me to say that never in aught have I been false
to you.
"Peace," said the King to Sir Launcelot: "We give you fifteen days
in which to leave this kingdom." Then Sir Launcelot sighed heavily
and said: "Full well I see that nothing availeth me." Then he went
to the Queen where she sat, and said: "Madam, the time is come when
I must leave this fair realm that I have loved. Think well of me, I
pray you, and send for me if ever there be aught in which a true
knight may serve lady." Therewith he turned him about and, without
greeting to any, passed through the hall, and with his faithful
knights rode to the Joyous Garde, though ever thereafter, in memory
of that sad day, he called it the Dolorous Garde.

In after times when the King had passed overseas to France, leaving
Sir Mordred to rule Britain in his stead, there came messengers from
Britain bearing letters for King Arthur; and more evil news than
they brought might not well be, for they told how Sir Mordred had
usurped his uncle's realm. First, he had caused it to be noised
abroad that King Arthur was slain in battle with Sir Launcelot, and,
since there be many ever ready to believe any idle rumour and eager
for any change, it had been no hard task for Sir Mordred to call the
lords to a Parliament and persuade them to make him King. But the
Queen could not be brought to believe that her lord was dead, so she
took refuge in the Tower of London from Sir Mordred's violence, nor
was she to be induced to leave her strong refuge for aught that
Mordred could promise or threaten.

Forthwith, King Arthur bade his host make ready to move, and when
they had reached the coast, they embarked and made sail to reach
Britain with all possible speed.

Sir Mordred, on his part, had heard of their sailing, and hasted to
get together a great army. It was grievous to see how many a stout
knight held by Mordred, ay, even many whom Arthur himself had raised
to honour and fortune; for it is the nature of men to be fickle.
Thus is was that, when Arthur drew near to Dover, he found Mordred
with a mighty host, waiting to oppose his landing. Then there was a
great sea-fight, those of Mordred's party going out in boats, to
board King Arthur's ships and slay him and his men or ever they
should come to land. Right valiantly did King Arthur bear him, as
was his wont, and boldly his followers fought in his cause, so that
at last they drove off their enemies and landed at Dover in spite of
Mordred and his array.

Now, by this time, many that Mordred had cheated by his lying
reports, had drawn unto King Arthur, to whom at heart they had ever
been loyal, knowing him for a true and noble King and hating
themselves for having been deceived by such a false usurper as Sir
Mordred.

One night, as King Arthur slept, he thought that Sir Gawain stood
before him, looking just as he did in life, and said to him: "My
uncle and my King, God in his great love has suffered me to come
unto you, to warn you that in no wise ye fight on the morrow; for if
ye do, ye shall be slain, and with you the most part of the people
on both sides. Make ye, therefore, a treaty." Immediately, the King
awoke and called to him the best and wisest of his knights. Then all
were agreed that, on any terms whatsoever, a treaty should be made
with Sir Mordred, even as Sir Gawain had said; and, with the dawn,
messengers went to the camp of the enemy, to call Sir Mordred to a
conference. So it was determined that the meeting should take place
in the sight of both armies, in an open space between the two camps,
and that King Arthur and Mordred should each be accompanied by
fourteen knights. Little enough faith had either in the other, so
when they set forth to the meeting, they bade their hosts join
battle if ever they saw a sword drawn.

Now as they talked, it befell that an adder, coming out of a bush
hard by, stung a knight in the foot; and he, seeing the snake, drew
his sword to kill it and thought no harm thereby. But on the instant
that the sword flashed, the trumpets blared on both sides and the
two hosts rushed to battle. Never was there fought a fight of such
enmity; for brother fought with brother, and comrade with comrade,
and fiercely they cut and thrust, with many a bitter word between;
while King Arthur himself, his heart hot within him, rode through
and through the battle, seeking the traitor Mordred. So they fought
all day, till at last the evening fell. Then Arthur, looking round
him, saw of his valiant knights but two left, Sir Lucan and Sir
Bedivere, and these sore wounded; and there, over against him, by a
great heap of the dead, stood Sir Mordred, the cause of all this
ruin. Thereupon the King, his heart nigh broken with grief for the
loss of his true knights, cried with a loud voice, "Traitor! now is
thy doom upon thee!" and with his spear gripped in both hands, he
rushed upon Sir Mordred and smote him that the weapon stood out a
fathom behind. And Sir Mordred knew that he had his death wound.
With all the might that he had, he thrust him up the spear to the
haft and, with his sword, struck King Arthur upon the head, that the
steel pierced the helmet and bit into the head; then Mordred fell
back, stark and dead.

Sir Lucan and Sir Bedivere went to the King where he lay, swooning
from the blow, and bore him to a little chapel on the seashore. As
they laid him on the ground, Sir Lucan fell dead beside the King,
and Arthur, coming to himself, found but Sir Bedivere alive beside
him.

So King Arthur lay wounded to the death, grieving, not that his end
was come, but for the desolation of his kingdom and the loss of his
good knights. And looking upon the body of Sir Lucan, he sighed and
said: "Alas! true knight, dead for my sake! If I lived, I should
ever grieve for thy death, but now mine own end draws nigh." Then,
turning to Sir Bedivere, who stood sorrowing beside him, he said:
"Leave weeping now, for the time is short and much to do. Hereafter
shalt thou weep if thou wilt. But take now my sword Excalibur,
hasten to the water side, and fling it into the deep. Then, watch
what happens and bring me word thereof." "My Lord," said Sir
Bedivere, "your command shall be obeyed"; and, taking the sword, he
departed. But as he went on his way, he looked on the sword, how
wondrously it was formed and the hilt all studded with precious
stones; and, as he looked, he called to mind the marvel by which it
had come into the King's keeping. For on a certain day, as Arthur
walked on the shore of a great lake, there had appeared above the
surface of the water a hand brandishing a sword. On the instant, the
King had leaped into a boat, and, rowing into the lake, had got the
sword and brought it back to land. Then he had seen how, on one side
the blade, was written, "Keep me," but on the other, "Throw me
away," and, sore perplexed, he had shown it to Merlin, the great
wizard, who said: "Keep it now. The time for casting away has not
yet come." Thinking on this, it seemed to Bedivere that no good, but
harm, must come of obeying the King's word; so hiding the sword
under a tree, he hastened back to the little chapel. Then said the
King: "What saw'st thou?" "Sir," answered Bedivere, "I saw naught
but the waves, heard naught but the wind." "That is untrue," said
King Arthur; "I charge thee, as thou art true knight, go again and
spare not to throw away the sword.
Sir Bedivere departed a second time, and his mind was to obey his
lord; but when he took the sword in his hand, he thought: "Sin it is
and shameful, to throw away so glorious a sword" Then, hiding it
again, he hastened back to the King. "What saw'st thou?" said Sir
Arthur. "Sir, I saw the water lap on the crags." Then spoke the King
in great wrath: "Traitor and unkind! Twice hast thou betrayed me!
Art dazzled by the splendour of the jewels, thou that, till now,
hast ever been dear and true to me? Go yet again, but if thou fail
me this time, I will arise and, with mine own hands, slay thee.
Then Sir Bedivere left the King and, that time, he took the sword
quickly from the place where he had hidden it and, forbearing even
to look upon it, he twisted the belt about it and flung it with all
his force into the water. A wondrous sight he saw for, as the sword
touched the water, a hand rose from out the deep, caught it,
brandished it thrice, and drew it beneath the surface.

Sir Bedivere hastened back to the King and told him what he had
seen. "It is well," said Arthur; "now, bear me to the water's edge;
and hasten, I pray thee, for I have tarried overlong and my wound
has taken cold." So Sir Bedivere raised the King on. his back and
bore him tenderly to the lonely shore, where the lapping waves
floated many an empty helmet and the fitful moonlight fell on the
upturned faces of the dead. Scarce had they reached the shore when
there hove in sight a barge, and on its deck stood three tall women,
robed all in black and wearing crowns on their heads. "Place me in
the barge," said the King, and softly Sir Bedivere lifted the King
into it. And these three Queens wept sore over Arthur, and one took
his head in her lap and chafed his hands, crying: "Alas! my brother,
thou hast been overlong in coming and, I fear me, thy wound has
taken cold." Then the barge began to move slowly from the land. When
Sir Bedivere saw this, he lifted up his voice and cried with a
bitter cry: "Ah! my Lord Arthur, thou art taken from me! And I,
whither shall I go?" "Comfort thyself," said the King, "for in me is
no comfort more. I pass to the Valley of Avilion, to heal me of my
grievous wound. If thou seest me never again, pray for me.
So the barge floated away out of sight, and Sir Bedivere stood
straining his eyes after it till it had vanished utterly. Then he
turned him about and journeyed through the forest until, at
daybreak, he reached a hermitage. Entering it, he prayed the holy
hermit that he might abide with him, and there he spent the rest of
his life in prayer and holy exercise.

But of King Arthur is no more known. Some men, indeed, say that he
is not dead, but abides in the happy Valley of Avilion until such
time as his country's need is sorest, when he shall come again and
deliver it. Others say that, of a truth, he is dead, and that, in
the far West, his tomb may be seen, and written on it these words:

 "Here lies Arthur, once King
 and King to be