 "It's just like _Kidnapped_, father," cried Hugh
 John, more truly than he dreamed of, "there's the
 Flight through the Heather, you remember, and the
 tall man is Allan Breck, heading off the soldiers
 after the Red Fox was shot. There was a sentinel
 that whistled, too--Allan heard him when he was
 fishing, and learned the tune--oh, and a lot of
 things the same!
 "I like the part best where Alice Bean gives him
 the papers," said Sweetheart; "perhaps she was in
 love with him, too.
 "Pshaw!" cried Toady Lion; "much good that did him.
 He never even got them looked at. But it was a pity
 that he did not get a chance at a King George
 soldier with that lovely sword and steel pistol.
 The Highlanders had all the luck.
 "I would have banged it off anyway," declared Hugh
 John; "fancy carrying a pistol like that all the
 way, scouting and going Indian file, and never
 getting a shot at anybody!
 "What I want to know," said Sweetheart, dreamily,
 "is why they all thought Edward a traitor. I
 believe the papers that Alice Bean Lean put in his
 bag would reveal the secret, if Waverley only had
 time to read them.
 "Him," said Sir Toady, naturally suspicious of all
 girls' heroes, "why, he's always falling down and
 getting put to bed. Then somebody has to nurse
 him. Why doesn't he go out and fight, like Fergus
 Mac-Ivor? Then perhaps Flora would have him; though
 what he wanted her for--a girl--I don't know. She
 could only play harps and--make poetry.
 So with this bitter scorn for the liberal arts,
 they all rushed off to enact the whole story, the
 tale-teller consenting, as occasion required, to
 take the parts of the wounded smith, the stern
 judge, or the Cameronian Captain. Hugh John
 hectored insufferably as Waverley. Sir Toady
 scouted and stalked as the tall Highlander, whom he
 refused to regard as anybody but Allan Breck.
 Sweetheart moved gently about as Alice
 Bean--preparing breakfast was quite in her
 line--while Maid Margaret, wildly excited, ran
 hither and thither as a sort of impartial chorus,
 warning all and sundry of the movements of the
 enemy.

 I saw her last, seated on a knoll and calling out
 "Bang" at the pitch of her voice. She was, she
 explained, nothing less imposing than the castle of
 Edinburgh itself, cannonading the ranks of the
 Pretender. While far away, upon wooden chargers,
 Balmawhapple's cavalry curvetted on the slopes of
 Arthur's Seat and cracked vain pistols at the
 frowning fortress. There was, in fact, all through
 the afternoon, a great deal of imagination loose in
 our neighbourhood. And even far into the gloaming
 sounds of battle, boastful recriminations, the
 clash of swords, the trample and rally of the heavy
 charge, even the cries of the genuinely wounded,
 came fitfully from this corner and that of the wide
 shrubberies.

 And when all was over, as they sat reunited, Black
 Hanoverian and White Cockade, victor and
 vanquished, in the kindly truce of the
 supper-table, Hugh John delivered his verdict.

 "That's the best tale you have told us yet. Every
 man of us needed to have sticking-plaster put on
 when we came in--even Sweetheart!
 Than which, of course, nothing _could_ have been
 more satisfactory.
