"Ye cheat-the-gallows, ye reiving villain--what think you is the value
of your head now!" cried the Bailie.

"Umph! Fairly weighed and Dutch measure," came the answer, "it might
weigh down one provost's, four bailies', a town-clerk's, six deacons',
besides stent-masters'--!
"Tell over your sins," interrupted Mr. Nicol Jarvie, "and prepare ye,
for if I speak the word--
"But ye will _not_ speak the word," said the Highlander, coolly.

"And why should I not?" said the Bailie, "answer me that--why should I
not?
"For three sufficient reasons, Bailie Jarvie," he retorted, "first, for
auld langsyne. Second, for the sake of the auld wife ayont the fire at
Stuckavrallachan, that made some mixture of our bloods--to my shame be
it spoken that _I_ should have a cousin a weaver. And lastly, Bailie,
because if I saw a sign of your betraying me, I would plaster the wall
there with your brains, long before any hand of man could rescue you!
"Ye are a bold, desperate villain, sir," retorted the undaunted Bailie,
"and ye ken that I ken ye to be so--but that were it only my own risk, I
would not hesitate a moment.
"I ken well," said the other, "ye have gentle blood in your veins, and I
would be loath to hurt my own kinsman. But I go out of here free as I
came in, or the very walls of Glasgow tolbooth shall tell the tale these
ten years to come!
"Well, well," said Mr. Jarvie, "after all, blood is thicker than water.
Kinsfolk should not see faults to which strangers are blind. And, as you
say, it would be sore news to the auld wife below the Ben, that you, ye
Hieland limmer, had knockit out my brains, or that I had got you strung
up in a halter. But, among other things, where is the good thousand
pound Scots that I lent you, and when am I to be seeing it?
"Where is it?" said the unknown, grimly, "why, where last year's snow
is, I trow!
"And that's on the tap o' Schehallion, ye Hieland dog," said Mr. Jarvie,
"and I look for payment from ye where ye stand.
"Ay," said the Highlander, unmoved, "but I carry neither snow nor silver
in my sporran. Ye will get it, Bailie--just when the King enjoys his ain
again, as the auld sang says!
Then the magistrate turned to Frank.

"And who may this be?" he demanded, "some reiver ye hae listed, Rob? He
looks as if he had a bold heart for the highway, and a neck that was
made express for the hangman's rope!
"This," said Owen, horrified at the Bailie's easy prediction as to the
fate of his young master, "this is Mr. Francis Osbaldistone, only son of
the head of our house--
"Ay, I have heard of him," said the Bailie, still more contemptuously,
"he that ran away and turned play-actor, through pure dislike to the
work an honest man should live by!
"Indeed," said the Highlander, "I had some respect for the callant even
before I kenned what was in him. But now I honour him for his contempt
of weavers and spinners, and sic-like mechanical persons.
"Ye are mad, Rob," said the Bailie, "mad as a March hare--though
wherefore a hare should be madder in the month of March than at
Martinmas is more than I can well say. But this young birkie here, that
ye are hounding the fastest way to the gallows--tell me, will all his
stage-plays and his poetries, or your broad oaths and drawn dirks tell
him where Rashleigh Osbaldistone is? Or Macbeth and all his kernes and
galloglasses, and your own to boot, procure him the five thousand pounds
to answer the bills that must fall due ten days hence--were they all
sold by auction at Glasgow Cross--basket hilts, Andrea Ferraras,
leathern targets, brogues, brechan, and sporrans?
"Ten days!" said Frank, instinctively drawing Diana Vernon's letter out
of his pocket. The time had elapsed, and he was now free to open it.

A thin sealed enclosure fell out, and the wandering airs of the prison
wafted it to Bailie Jarvie's feet. He lifted it and at once handed it to
the Highlander, who, after glancing at the address, proceeded calmly to
open it.

Frank tried vainly to interpose.

"You must first satisfy me that the letter is intended for you, before I
can allow you to read it," he said.

"Make yourself easy, Mr. Osbaldistone," answered the Highlander, looking
directly at him for the first time, "remember Justice Inglewood, Clerk
Jobson, Mr. Morris--above all, remember your very humble servant, Robert
Campbell, and the beautiful Diana Vernon.
The vague resemblance which had been haunting Frank ever since he had
heard this man's voice was now at once made plain. The cloak being
dropped and the man's face turned full upon him, he saw that it was
indeed the same Highland drover who had borne unexpected testimony in
his favour when he was in danger of his life in the house of Mr. Justice
Inglewood.

"It is a difficult cast she has given me to play," said the Highlander,
looking at Die Vernon's letter, "but I daresay I shall be able to serve
you. Only you must come and visit me in my own country. I cannot hope to
aid you on the paving stones of Glasgow. And you, Bailie, if you will
come up with this young gentleman as far as the Clachan of Aberfoil, I
will pay you the thousand pounds Scots that I owe you.
"Such a journey ill becomes my place," said the Bailie, doubtfully, "but
if I did come, would you really and soothfully pay me the siller?
"I swear to you," said the Highlander, "by him that sleeps beneath the
grey stane at Inch Cailleach!

"But," he continued, "I must be budging. For the air of the Glasgow
tolbooth is no that over salutary to a Highland constitution.
"Ohon," said the Bailie, "that I should be art and part in an escape
from justice--it will be a disgrace to me all the days of my life!
Aweel, we have all our backslidings to answer for. Stanchells, open the
door!
The head jailor stared at the two visitors who had gotten into Mr.
Owen's cell without his leave, but he was reassured by the Bailie's
careless "Friends of mine, Stanchells, friends of mine!
The party descended to the lower vestibule, and there called more than
once for Dougal, but without effect.

Whereupon Campbell observed, with a quiet smile, that "if Dougal was the
lad he kenned him, he would scarce wait to be thanked for his share of
that night's work, but would now be full trot for the pass of
Ballamaha--
"And am I myself," cried the angry Bailie, "to be locked up in the
tolbooth all night? Send for fore-hammers, sledge-hammers, pincers! Send
for Deacon Yettlin, the smith. And as for that Hieland blackguard, he
shall hang as high as Haman--
"When ye catch him," said Campbell, gravely, "but wait, surely the jail
door is not locked!
And so it turned out.

"He has some glimmerings of sense, that Dougal creature," added the
Highlander; "he kenned that an open door might have served me at a
pinch!
So saying he sprang into the darkness, and soon the street resounded to
low signal whistles, uttered and instantly replied to.

"Hear to the Hieland deevils," said Mr. Jarvie; "they think themselves
already on the skirts of Ben Lomond! But what's this?
There was a clash of iron at his feet, and stooping to the causeway
cobbles, the Bailie lifted the keys of the jail which Dougal had carried
away in his flight.

"Indeed," he said, "and that's just as well. For they cost the burgh
siller, and there might have been some talk in the council about the
loss of them, that I would little like to have heard. It would not be
the first time they had cast up my kin to me, if Bailie Grahame and some
others should get wind of this night's work.
The next morning at the Bailie's hospitable table, Frank Osbaldistone
met Mr. Owen--but altogether another Owen from him of the
tolbooth--neat, formal, and well brushed as ever, though still in the
lowest of spirits about the misfortunes of the house.

They had not long begun when Frank, who could be brusque enough upon
occasion, startled the Bailie by the question, "And pray, by the bye,
Mr. Nicol Jarvie, who is this Mr. Robert Campbell whom I met last
night?
The question, abruptly put, seemed to knock the worthy Bailie all of a
heap. He stammered and repeated it over and over, as if he had no answer
ready.

"Wha's Mr. Robert Campbell? Ahem--ahay--! Wha's Mr. Robert Campbell,
quo' he?
"Yes," repeated the young Englishman, "I mean who and what is he?
"Why, he's--ahay! He's--ahem! Where did _you_ meet Mr. Robert Campbell,
as you call him yourself?
"I met him by chance," Frank answered promptly, "some months ago, in the
north of England.
"Then, Mr. Osbaldistone," said the Bailie, doggedly, "ye ken just as
much about him as I do!
"I should suppose not, Mr. Jarvie," said Frank, "since you are, it
seems, both his relation and his friend!
"There is doubtless some cousinship between us," said the Bailie, with
reluctance, "but I have seen little of Rob since he left the
cattle-dealing. He was hardly used by those who might have treated him
better, poor fellow.
More than this for the moment Frank could not extract from Mr. Jarvie,
and indeed his father's affairs were naturally the first consideration.
As Frank could not help with their business matters and arrangements,
the Bailie dismissed him without ceremony, telling him that he might go
up to the College Yards, where he would find some that could speak Greek
and Latin, but that he must be back at one o'clock "_preceesely_" to
partake of the Bailie's family leg of mutton and additional tup's head.

It was while Frank Osbaldistone was pacing to and fro in the College
Yards, that, from behind a hedge, he saw three men talking together. At
first he could hardly believe his eyes. For one of them, the very sight
of whom caused a disagreeable thrill to pass through his body, was none
other than Rashleigh himself, while the other two were Morris and Mr.
MacVittie,--the very three men who could do him the most harm in the
world.

At the end of the avenue MacVittie and Morris left the gardens, while
Rashleigh returned alone, apparently pacing the walk in deep meditation.
Frank suddenly appeared before him, and challenged him to give up the
deeds and titles he had stolen from his father.

Rashleigh, whom no surprise could stir out of his cool native audacity,
answered that it would be better for his cousin to go and amuse himself
in his world of poetical imagination, and to leave the business of life
to men who understood and could conduct it.

Words grew hotter and hotter between the two young men, till Rashleigh,
stung by a reference to Diana Vernon, bade Frank follow him to a
secluded place where he would be able to chastise him for his boyish
insolence.

Accordingly Frank followed him, keeping a keen watch on his adversary
lest he should attempt any treachery. And it was well that he did so.
For Rashleigh's sword was at his breast before he had time to draw, or
even to lay down his cloak, and he only saved his life by springing a
pace or two backward in all haste.

In the matter of fence, Frank found Rashleigh quite his match--his own
superior skill being counterbalanced by Rashleigh's longer and more
manageable sword and by his great personal strength and ferocity. He
fought, indeed, more like a fiend than a man. Every thrust was meant to
kill, and the combat had all the appearance of being to the death.

At last Frank stumbled accidentally, and Rashleigh's sword passed
through his coat and out at the back, just grazing his side, whereupon
Frank, seizing the hilt of his antagonist's sword, shortened his grip
and was on the point of running him through the body. But the
death-grapple was put an end to in the nick of time, by the intervention
of Campbell, who suddenly appeared out of the bushes and threw himself
between them. Rashleigh demanded fiercely of the Highlander how he dared
to interfere where his honour was concerned.




But Campbell, with a whistle of his broadsword about his head, reminded
him that so far as "daring" went, he was ready to make mincemeat of the
pair of them. But though this cooled Rashleigh's temper at once, it was
far from appeasing Frank, who swore that he would keep hold of his
cousin till he had given up all he had stolen from his father.

"You hear!" said Rashleigh to Campbell; "he rushes upon his fate. On his
own head be it!
But the Highlander would not permit the young man to be ill treated,
only for standing up for his own father. He took hold of Frank, however,
and by a gigantic effort he caused him to release Rashleigh's coat which
he had seized in his anger.

"Let go his collar, Mr. Francis," he commanded. "What he says is true.
Ye are more in danger of the magistrate in this place than what he is.
Take the bent, Mr. Rashleigh. Make one pair of legs worth two pair of
hands. You have done that before now.
Rashleigh, with a last threat of future revenge, took up his sword,
wiped it, put it back in its sheath, and disappeared in the bushes.

In spite of his struggles the Highlander held Frank till it was vain for
him to pursue Rashleigh, and then Campbell had some advice to give him.

"Let him alone," he said. "I tell you, man, he has the old trap set for
you. And here I cannot give you the same help that I did in the house of
Justice Inglewood. Now go your ways home, like a good bairn. Keep out of
the sight of Rashleigh, and Morris, and that MacVittie animal. Mind the
Clachan of Aberfoil, and by the word of a gentleman I will not see you
wronged.
On his way back Frank had his slight wound dressed by a surgeon and
apothecary in the neighbourhood, who refused to believe his explanation
about the button of his adversary's foil slipping.

"There never was button on the foil that made this!" he said. "Ah, young
blood--young blood! But fear not--we surgeons are a secret generation!
And so dismissed, Frank soon found his way back to Mr. Jarvie's family
leg of mutton and tup's head, only a few minutes after the appointed
stroke of one.

 * * * * *


III. THE BAILIE FIGHTS WITH FIRE

When Frank Osbaldistone, the Bailie, and Andrew Fairservice, set forward
toward the Highlands, their way lay for the first stage over barren
wastes, with the blue line of the Grampian Hills continually before
their eyes.

Andrew had as usual tried to cheat his master by getting rid of his own
pony and buying another on Frank's account. But the Bailie soon caused
Andrew to recover his old horse on the penalty of being at once haled
off to prison.

Night came on before the little party of three arrived at the inn of the
Clachan of Aberfoil, having previously crossed the infant Forth by an
ancient bridge, high and narrow.

The inn was a mere hovel, but the windows were cheerfully lighted up.
There was a sound of revelry within that promised good cheer to hungry
men, and the party were on the point of entering, when Andrew
Fairservice showed them a peeled wand which was set across the half-open
door.

"That means," he said, "that some of their great men are birling at the
wine within, and will little like to be disturbed.
It proved to be even so. The landlady was most anxious to keep them out.
They could get rest and shelter, she promised them, within seven
Scottish miles--that is to say, within at least double that number of
English ones. Her house was taken up, and the gentlemen in possession
would ill like to be intruded on by strangers. Better gang farther than
fare worse.

But Frank, being an Englishman and hungry for his dinner, was ready to
do battle against all odds in order to get it.

The interior of the inn of Aberfoil was low and dark. The smoke of the
fire hung and eddied under the gloomy roof about five feet from the
ground. But underneath all was kept clear by the currents of air that
rushed about the house when the wind blew through the wicker door and
the miserable walls of stone plastered with mud.

Three men were sitting at an oak table near the fire. Two of these were
in Highland dress, the first small and dark, with a quick and irritable
expression of countenance. He wore the "trews" of tartan, which in
itself showed him a man of consideration. The other Highlander was a
tall, strong man, with the national freckled face and high cheekbones.
The tartan he wore had more of red in it than that of the other. The
third was in Lowland dress, a bold, stout-looking man, in a showily
laced riding-dress and a huge cocked hat. His sword and a pair of
pistols lay on the table before him.

All three were drinking huge draughts of the Highland drink called
"Usquebagh," and they spoke loudly and eagerly one to the other, now in
Gaelic, now in English. A third Highlander, wrapped in his plaid and
with his face hidden, lay on the floor, apparently asleep.

The three gentlemen were at first unconscious of the invasion. They
continued their loud conversation, and it was not until Frank
Osbaldistone called the landlady that they paused and looked at them,
apparently stricken dumb by his audacity.

"You make yourself at home," said the lesser Celt, in very good English,
which however he spoke with an air of haughty disdain.

"I usually do, sir," said Frank, "when I come into a house of public
entertainment.
"And did she not see," demanded the taller man, "by the white wand at
the door, that gentlemans had taken up the public house on their ain
business?
"I do not pretend to understand the customs of this country," said
Frank, with firmness, "but I have yet to learn how any three persons are
entitled to exclude all other travellers from the only place of shelter
and refreshment for miles around.
The Bailie here offered a stoup of brandy as an appropriate means of
establishing a good understanding, but the three natives proceeded to
snuff the air and work themselves up into a passion with the evident
intention of ending the quarrel by a fray.

"We are three to three," said the lesser Highlander, glancing his eyes
at the intruding party. "If ye be pretty men, draw!
And so saying, he drew his own broadsword and advanced upon Frank. The
young Englishman, knowing the superiority of his rapier to the claymore,
especially in the confined space, was in no fear as to the issue of the
combat. But when the gigantic Highlander advanced upon the worthy
magistrate of Glasgow, after trying in vain once or twice to draw his
father's _shabble_, as he called it, from its sheath,--a weapon which
had last seen the light at Bothwell Bridge,--the Bailie seized as a
substitute the red-hot coulter of a plough, which had been sticking in
the fire. At the very first pass he set the Highlander's plaid on fire,
and thereafter compelled him to keep a respectful distance. Andrew
Fairservice had, of course, vanished at the very first symptoms of a
storm, but the Lowlander, disappointed of an antagonist, drew honourably
off and took no share in the fight. Nevertheless the Bailie, built for
more peaceful pursuits, was quickly getting the worst of it, when from
the floor started up the sleeping Highlander, crying, "Hersel' has eaten
the town bread at the Cross of Glasgow, and by her troth, she will fight
for Bailie Jarvie at the Clachan of Aberfoil!
And seconding words with blows, he fell upon his tall countryman. As
both were armed with targes made of wood and studded with brass, the
combat was more remarkable for noise and clatter than for serious
damage. And it was not long before the Lowlander cried out, taking upon
himself the office of peacemaker: "Hold your hands, gentlemen--enough
done, enough done! The strangers have shown themselves men of honour,
and have given reasonable satisfaction.
There was no wish to continue the fray, save perhaps on the part of the
Bailie's antagonist, who demanded to know who was going to pay for the
hole burnt in his bonnie plaid, through which, he declared, any one
might put a kail-pot.

But the Bailie, pleased with himself for having shown spirit, declared
that the Highlander should have a new plaid, especially woven, of his
own clan-colours. And he added that if he could find the worthy lad who
had taken his quarrel upon himself, he would bestow upon him a gill of
_aqua-vitæ_.

But the Highlander who had been so ready on the Bailie's behalf was now
nowhere to be found. The supper was brought in presently, as if the
landlady had only been waiting for the end of the fray in order to serve
the repast.

The Bailie had from the first recognised the Lowlander as one to whom
the deacon his father had lent money, and with whose family there were
many ties of cordiality and confidence. So while the friendly converse
was thus proceeding indoors, Frank went out to find Andrew Fairservice,
and on his way the landlady gave him a folded scrap of paper, saying
that she was glad to be rid of it--what with Saxons, soldiers, and
robbers--life was not worth living on the Highland line!

By the light of a torch Frank read as follows, "For the honoured hands
of Mr. F. O., a Saxon young gentleman--These!
The letter proved to be from Campbell, and informed Frank that as there
were night hawks abroad, he must hold no communication with any one lest
it should lead to future trouble. The person who gave him the letter
might be trusted, but that in the meantime it would be well to avoid a
meeting with "R. M. C.
Frank was much disappointed at this deferring of the hope of aiding his
father, by recovering the papers and titles which Rashleigh had stolen.
But still there was no help for it. And so, after dragging Andrew out of
the corner of the shed, where he was hidden behind a barrel of feathers,
he returned to the inn.

Here he found the Bailie high in dispute with his quondam friend, the
Lowlander Galbraith. The quarrel concerned the Duke of Argyle and the
Clan Campbell, but most of all a certain freebooter of the name of Rob
Roy, who, as it now appeared, they were all assembled to pursue and make
an end of.

North and east the passes were being held. The westland clans were out.
Southward Major Galbraith was in command of a body of Lennox horse, and
to a certainty Rob Roy would swing in a rope by the morrow's morn.

Scarcely were the words spoken when the ordered tramp of infantry on the
march was heard, and an officer, followed by two or three files of
soldiers, entered the apartment. It gave Frank a thrill of pleasure to
remark his English accent, after the Scotch which he had been listening
to ever since he left Osbaldistone Hall.

But he liked somewhat less what he was next to hear. The English officer
had received instructions to place under arrest two persons, one young
and the other elderly, travelling together. It seemed to him that Frank
and the Bailie answered fairly well to this description.

In spite of the protests and threats of the honourable magistrate, he
ordered them both to follow him in his advance into the Highland
country, upon which he was immediately to set out.

The letter which Frank had received from the landlady of the inn, being
found upon him, was held to be evidence that he had been in treasonable
correspondence with Rob Roy, whose usual initials, indeed, were at the
bottom of the note. Next the shock-headed Highlander who had taken the
Bailie's quarrel upon him, having been captured, was brought before the
officer, and commanded, on pain of being instantly hanged, to lead them
to the place where he had left the Mac-Gregor. After long persuasion,
some of it of the roughest sort, poor Dougal consented for five guineas
to act as guide to the party of soldiers under Captain Thornton--for
such was the name of the English officer.

This sinful compliance of Dougal's angered the Bailie so much that he
cried to the soldiers to take Dougal away, because now he deserved
hanging for his treachery more than ever.

This drew the retort from the Corporal who was acting as hangman, that
if it were the Bailie who was going to be hanged, he would be in no
such desperate hurry!

But Dougal promised to be faithful, and in a few minutes the English
officer had paid the reckonings of the three gentlemen whom Frank had
found drinking at the inn of Aberfoil. The hot and smoky atmosphere of
the miserable inn was exchanged for the wide hill breezes. But on their
passage through the villages the hatred of the natives, mostly women and
children, for the "red soldiers" broke forth into shrill cursing. Andrew
Fairservice, who alone of the three understood Gaelic, grew pale with
terror at the threats which were lavished upon them.

"And the worst of all is," he said, trembling, "that the owercome o'
their sang is that we are to gang up the glen and see what we are to
get.

IV. THE DROWNING OF THE SPY

Whereupon the Bailie took it on himself to warn Captain Thornton that
the Highlanders, especially under a leader so daring as Rob Roy, were in
the habit of attacking their enemies in narrow passes where regular
troops had no chance against them. But the officer was not to be turned
aside. He had his orders and he meant to carry them out. Rob Roy was
certainly trapped, he said. All the upper passes were in the hands of
the Highlanders of the western clans. Garschattachin had closed in on
the south with the Lennox Horse. The latest tidings of the freebooter
were in accordance with the information so reluctantly given by Dougal,
and were to the effect that Rob Roy had sent away the larger part of his
clan, and was seeking escape alone, or with very few in his company,
trusting most likely to his superior knowledge of the passes.

Meanwhile Dougal their guide answered with a natural impatience to all
complaints that he was leading them by difficult or dangerous roads.

"If," he said, with an appearance of reason, "gentlemans were seeking
the Red Gregarach, they must expect some wee danger. And if they likit
grand roads, they should hae bided at Glasgow.
The party was continuing to follow the narrow path by the lake, till
they came to a halt at a place where the path left the water and climbed
upward by several zigzags to the top of a rock, on which the advance
guard reported that they had seen the bonnets of the Highlanders as well
as the shining barrels of their long muskets.

The officer now ordered the Corporal with three files to dislodge the
enemy from this stronghold. The soldiers accordingly moved forward while
Captain Thornton, with the rest of his party, followed in support. But
immediate attack was prevented by the appearance of a woman on the top
of the rock.

"Stand!" she cried in commanding tones, "and tell me what you seek in
Mac-Gregor's country.

She was tall and imposing in figure. Her features had once been
handsome, but were now wasted with grief and passion. She wore a man's
plaid and belt, a man's bonnet was on her head, and she held a naked
sword in her hand.

"That's Helen Mac-Gregor, Rob's wife," said the Bailie, in a whisper of
alarm; "there will be broken heads before long!
"What seek ye here?" she demanded again of Captain Thornton, who had
advanced to reconnoitre.

"We seek the outlaw Rob Roy Mac-Gregor Campbell," said the officer; "we
make no war upon women. Therefore offer no opposition to the King's
troops and assure yourself of civil treatment.
"I am no stranger to your tender mercies," the woman said, "you have
left me neither name nor fame--neither house nor hold, blanket nor
bedding, cattle to feed us, nor flocks to clothe us! Ye have taken from
us all--all! The very name of our ancestors ye have taken away, and now
ye come for our lives!
"I seek no man's life," said the officer. "I only execute my orders.
Forward there--march!
"Hurrah, boys--for Rob Roy's head and a purse of gold!" cried the
Corporal, taking the word from his officer.

He quickened his pace to a run, followed by his six men. But as they
reached the first loop of the ascent of the cliff, there came the flash
of a dozen muskets from both sides of the pass. The Corporal, shot
through the body, still struggled to reach the summit. He clung to the
rock, but after a desperate effort his grasp relaxed. He slipped from
the bare face of the cliff into the deep lake, where he perished. Of the
soldiers three fell with him, while the others retired as best they
could upon their main body.

"Grenadiers, to the front!" cried the steady voice of Captain Thornton,
"open your pouches--handle your grenades--blow up your matches--fall
on!
The whole party advanced with a shout, headed by Captain Thornton, the
grenadiers preparing to throw their grenades among the bushes, and the
rank and file ready to support them in a close and combined assault.

Dougal, finding himself forgotten in the scuffle, had wisely crept into
the thicket which overhung the road, and was already mounting the cliff
with the agility of a wild-cat. Frank hastily followed his example. For
the spattering fire, directed on the advancing party of soldiers, the
loud reports of muskets, and the explosion of the grenades, made the
path no comfortable place for those without arms. The Bailie, however,
had only been able to scramble about twenty feet above the path when,
his foot slipping, he would certainly have fallen into the lake had not
the branch of a ragged thorn caught his riding-coat and supported him in
mid-air, where he hung very like a sign in front of a hostelry. Andrew
Fairservice had made somewhat better speed, but even he had only
succeeded in reaching a ledge from which he could neither ascend nor yet
come down. On this narrow promontory he footed it up and down, much like
a hen on a hot girdle, and roared for mercy in Gaelic and English
alternately, accordingly as he thought the victory inclined toward the
soldiers or went in favour of the outlaws.

But on this occasion it was the Highlanders who were destined to win.
They fought altogether under cover, and, from the number of musket
flashes they held also a great superiority in point of numbers. At all
events Frank soon saw the English officer stripped of his hat and arms,
and his men, with sullen and dejected countenances, delivering up their
muskets to the victorious foe.

The Bailie was, however, rescued by "the Dougal cratur," as the
magistrate called him, who cut off the tails of his coat and lowered him
to the ground. Then, when at last he was somewhat appeased, on account
of Frank's seeming desertion, he counselled that they should be in no
hurry to approach Mac-Gregor's wife, who would certainly be most
dangerous in the moment of victory.

Andrew Fairservice had already been espied on his airy perch, from which
the Highlanders soon made him descend, by threatening him with their
guns and even firing a stray shot or two over his head, so that
presently he fell to the earth among them. The outlaws stood ready to
receive him, and ere he could gain his legs, they had, with the most
admirable celerity, stripped him of periwig, hat, coat, doublet,
stockings, and shoes. In other circumstances this might have been
amusing for Frank to watch. For though Andrew fell to the earth a
well-clothed and decent burgher--he arose a forked, uncased, bald-pated,
and beggarly-looking scarecrow.

And indeed Frank and the Bailie would soon have shared the same fate,
had not Dougal appeared on the scene in the nick of time, and compelled
the plunderers to restore their spoil. So to Helen Mac-Gregor they were
taken, Dougal fighting and screaming all the way, evidently determined
to keep his captives to himself, or at least to prevent others from
claiming them.

With many but (considering the time and occasion) somewhat ill-chosen
words of familiarity, the Bailie claimed kindred with Rob Roy's wife.
But in this he did himself more harm than good, for his ill-timed
jocularity grated on Helen Mac-Gregor's ear, in her present mood of
exaltation, and she promptly commanded that the Sassenachs should one
and all be bound and thrown into the deeps of the lake.

But here Dougal threw himself between the angry woman and her prisoners
with such vehemence that he was able to stave off, at least for a time,
the execution of the supreme sentence. These men were, he said, friends
of the Chief and had come up on his assurance to meet him at the Clachan
of Aberfoil.

But at that very moment the wild strains of the pibroch were heard
approaching, and a strong body of Highlanders in the prime of life
arrived on the scene. It now appeared that those who had fought and
beaten the troops were either beardless boys or old men scarcely able to
hold a musket. But there was no joy of victory on the faces of the
newcomers. The pipes breathed a heart-breaking lament.

_Rob Roy was taken!_

"Taken," repeated Helen Mac-Gregor, "taken!--And do you live to say so?
Did I nurse you for this, coward dogs--that you should see your father
prisoner, and come back to tell it?
The sons of Rob Roy, the elder James, tall and handsome, the younger
Robin Oig, ruddy and dark, both hung their heads. And after the first
burst of her indignation was over, the elder explained how Rob Roy had
been summoned to bide tryst with--(here Frank Osbaldistone missed the
name, but it sounded like his own). Having, however, some suspicion of
treachery, Rob Roy had ordered the messenger to be detained, and had
gone forth attended by only Angus Breck and little Rory. Within half an
hour Angus Breck came back with the tidings that the Chief had been
captured by a party of the Lennox militia under Galbraith of
Garschattachin, who were in waiting for him.

Helen Mac-Gregor had now two purposes to carry out. First, she sent
messengers in every direction to gather assistance for an immediate
attack on the Lowlanders, in order to effect the rescue of her husband.
Second, she ordered the spy, whose false message had sent her husband to
his doom, to be brought before her. For him there was no pity.

When he was haled, pale and trembling before the enraged wife of the
Mac-Gregor, what was Frank's astonishment to discover that he was none
other than Morris, the very same man who had accused him of the robbery
of his portmanteau at Squire Inglewood's, and whom he had last seen in
the Glasgow College Yards, walking and talking with Rashleigh
Osbaldistone.

A brief command to her followers--and the wretched man was bound. A
heavy stone was tied about his neck in a plaid, and he was hurled
instantly into the depths of the lake, where he perished, amid the loud
shouts of vindictive triumph which went up from the clan.


INTERLUDE OF EXPOSTULATION

 "Oh, do go on," said Sweetheart, actually pushing
 the narrator's arm, as if to shake more of the tale
 out of him. "What a perfectly horrid place to stop
 at! Tell us what happened after.
 "Nothing more happened to Morris, I can promise
 you that!" I replied.

 "That's not nice of you," said Sweetheart. "I am
 quite sorry for the poor man--in spite of all he
 had done!
 "Well, I'm not," said Sir Toady Lion, truculently,
 "he deserved it all, and more. He has done nothing
 but tell lies and betray people all through the
 story--right from the very beginning.
 "Besides, he was afraid!" said Hugh John, with whom
 this was the sin without forgiveness.

 "Well," said Sweetheart, "so am I afraid often--of
 mice, and rats, and horrid creeping things.
 "Huh," said Sir Toady, crinkling up his nose, "you
 are a girl--of course you are afraid!
 "And I know," retorted Sweetheart, "two noble,
 brave, gallant, fearless, undaunted BOYS, who
 daren't go up to the garret in the dark--_there!_
 "That's not fair," said Hugh John; "that was only
 once, after father had been telling us about the
 Hand-from-under-the-Bed that pulled the bedclothes
 off! Anybody would have been frightened at that.
 You, yourself--
 "Oh, but I don't pretend," cried Sweetheart; "I
 don't need to. I am only a girl. But for all that,
 I went up and lit the candle in a bedroom belonging
 to two boys, who dared not even go up the stair
 holding each other by the hand!
 "If you say that, I'll hit you," said Sir Toady.

 "Will you!" said Sweetheart, clearing for action;
 "we'll see about that. It's only mice _I_ am afraid
 of--not cowardly boys!
 I hastened to still the rising storm, and in order
 to bring the conversation back to the subject of
 Rob Roy, I asked Hugh John if this were not more to
 his taste in the matter of heroes.

 "Oh, Rob Roy's all right," he said; "that is, when
 once you get to him. But Frank Osbaldistone is just
 like the rest--always being tied up, or taken round
 where he doesn't want to go. Besides, he ran away
 at the battle!
 "Well," said I, "he had no arms, and besides it was
 not his quarrel. He couldn't fight either for the
 soldiers or for the Highlanders. At any rate, you
 can't deny that he did fight with Rashleigh in the
 College Yards of Glasgow!
 "Yes, and he got wounded. And then Rob Roy
 threatened to lick them both--I don't count that
 much!" said the contemner of heroes. "But, at any
 rate, it was something. And he didn't go spooning
 about after girls--that's good, anyway.
 "Don't be too sure," said Sweetheart; "there's Die
 Vernon in the background.
 "Well, of course, a fellow _has_ to do some of it
 if he's a hero," said Hugh John, who has always
 high ideas of the proper thing; "it's in his part,
 you see, and he has to--else he wouldn't be
 respected. But I think if ever I had to be a hero,
 I would dress up Sir Toady for the girl's part.
 Then if he monkeyed too much, why--I could welt him
 well after. But (he added with a sigh), with a
 girl, you can't, of course.
 "Well, anyway," said Sweetheart, thinking that
 possibly the tale-teller might feel aggrieved at
 these uncomplimentary remarks, "_I_ think it is
 just a beautiful story, and I love the dear Bailie
 for being willing to go all that way with Frank,
 and get hung up in the tree by the coat-tails and
 all!
 "Rats!" said Hugh John, contemptuously, "think if
 he had known _that_, he would ever have left
 Glasgow--not much!
 "Well, it was beautiful, I think," said Sweetheart,
 "but I _am_ sorry that they drowned the poor man
 Morris, especially when he was so very frightened.
 But the instant indignant outcry of the boys
 silenced her. Lochs twelve feet deep, it speedily
 appeared, ought to be provided by law everywhere
 over the kingdoms three, for the accommodation of
 such "sweeps" and "sneaks" and "cowards.
 Then Mistress Margaret spoke up for the first time.
 She had been sitting with her eyes fixed dreamily
 on the sparkle of the logs in the library
 fireplace.

 "What a blessing it is," she said, "that this is a
 rainy Saturday, and so we do not need to wait for
 more. Please go on with the story--JUST where you
 left off.
 And Maid Margaret's form of government being
 absolute monarchy, I did so, and the result was
