
Once upon a time a hunter was roaming through the wildwood when he heard
a voice crying piteously for aid . Following the sound , the hunter
plunged ahead , and discovered a dwarf caught in a pit which had been dug
to trap wild animals . 

After the hunter had rescued the dwarf from his prison , the little man
said to him :  " Go ten leagues to the north till you arrive at a gigantic
pine; then turn to the east , and go ten leagues more till you come to a
black castle . Enter the castle without fear , and you will discover a
round room in which stands a round ebony table laden with gold and
jewels . Help yourself to the treasure , and return home at once . And do
not--now mark me well--go up into the turret of the castle; for if you
do , evil will come of it . " 

So the hunter thanked the dwarf , and after making sure that he had
plenty of bread and cheese in his knapsack , hurried northwards as fast
as his legs could carry him . Through bramble and brier , through valley
and wooded dale went he , and at dusk he came to a gigantic pine standing
solitary in a rocky field . Wearied with his long journey , the hunter lay
down beneath the pine and slept . 

When it was dawn he woke refreshed , and turning his eyes toward the
level rays of the rising sun , began his journey to the east . Presently
he reached a height in the forest , and from this height , he saw , not
very far away , a black turret rising over the ocean of bright leaves . At
high noon he arrived at the castle . It was ruinous and quite deserted;
grass grew in the courtyard and between the bricks of the terrace , and
the oaken door was as soft and rotten as a log that has long been buried
in mire . 

Entering the castle , the hunter soon discovered the round room . A table
laden with wonderful treasures stood in the centre of the chamber , 
directly under a shower of sunlight pouring through a half-ruined window
in the mildewed wall . How the diamonds and precious stones sparkled and
gleamed ! 

Now , while the hunter was filling his pockets , the flash of a jewel
lying on the floor happened to catch his eye , and looking down , he saw
that a kind of trail of jewels lay along the floor leading out of the
room . Following the scattered gems , --which had the appearance of having
been spilled from some treasure-casket heaped too high , --the hunter came
to a low door , and opening this door , he discovered a flight of stone
steps leading to the turret . The steps were strewn carelessly with the
finest emeralds , topazes , beryls , moonstones , rubies , and crystal
diamonds . 

Remembering the counsel of his friend the dwarf , however , the hunter did
not go up the stairs , but hurried home with his treasure . 

When the hunter returned to his country , the wonderful treasures which
he had taken from the castle in the wood made him a very rich man , and
in a short time the news of his prosperity came to the ears of the King . 
This King was the wickedest of rogues , and his two best friends , the
Chamberlain and the Chancellor , were every bit as unscrupulous as he . 
They oppressed the people with taxes , they stole from the poor , they
robbed the churches; indeed there was no injustice which they were not
ready to commit . So , when the Chamberlain heard of the hunter ' s wealth , 
he--being a direct , straightforward rascal--declared that the simplest
thing to do would be to kill the hunter and take his money . 

The Chancellor , who was somewhat more cunning and worldly , declared that
it would be better to throw the hunter into a foul , dark dungeon till he
was ready to buy his freedom with all his wealth . 

The King , who was the wickedest and wisest of the precious three , 
declared that the best thing to do was to find out whence the hunter had
got his treasure , so that , if there happened to be any left , they could
go and get it . Then of course , they could kill the hunter and take his
treasure too . 

Thus it came to pass that by a royal order the hunter was thrown into a
horrible prison , and told that his only hope of release lay in revealing
the origin of his riches . So , after he had been slowly starved and
cruelly beaten , he told of the treasure castle in the wood . 

On the following morning , the King , the Chamberlain , and the Chancellor , 
taking with them some strong linen bags and some pack mules , rode forth
in quest of the treasure . Great was their joy when they found the
treasure castle and the treasure room just as the hunter had described . 
The Chancellor poured the shining gems through his claw-like fingers , 
and the King and the Chamberlain threw their arms around each others ' 
shoulders and danced a jig as well as their age and dignity would
permit . The first fine careless rapture over , they began pouring the
treasure into the linen sacks they had brought with them , and these , 
filled to the brim , they carried to the castle door . 

Soon not the tiniest gem was left on the table . Suddenly the Chamberlain
happened to catch sight of the gems strewn along the floor . 

 " See , see ! " he cried , his voice shrill and greedy .  " There is yet more to
be had ! " 

So the three rogues got down on their hands and knees and began stuffing
the stray jewels into their bulging pockets . The trail of jewels led
them across the hall to the little door opening on the stairway , and up
this stairway they scrambled as fast as they could go . 

At the top of the stair , in the turret , they found another round room
lit by three narrow , barred windows , and in the centre of this turret
chamber , likewise laden with gold and jewels , they found another ebony
table . With shrieks of delight , the King and the Chancellor and the
Chamberlain ran to this second treasure , and plunged their hands in the
glittering golden mass . 

Suddenly , a great bell rang in the castle , a great brazen bell whose
deep clang beat about them in throbbing , singing waves . 

 " What ' s that ? " said the three rogues in one breath , and rushed together
to the door . 

It was locked ! An instant later there was a heavy explosion which threw
them all to the floor , tossing the treasure over them; and then , wonder
of wonders , the castle turret , with the three rogues imprisoned in it , 
detached itself from the rest of the castle , and flew off into the air . 
From the barred windows , the King , the Chamberlain , and the Chancellor
saw league upon league of the forest rushing by beneath them . Suddenly
the flying room began to descend swiftly , and landed lightly as a bird
in the middle of a castle courtyard . Strange-looking fellows with human
bodies and heads of horses came rushing toward the enchanted turret , and
seized its prisoners . In a few moments they were brought before the King
to whom the treasure belonged . 

Now this King was a brother of the dwarf whom the hunter had rescued
from the pit . He had a little gold crown on his head , and sat on a
little golden throne with cushions of crimson velvet . 

 " With what are these three charged ? " said the Dwarf-King . 

 " With having tried to rob the treasure castle , Your Majesty , " replied
one of the horse-headed servitors in a firm , stable tone . 

 " Then send for the Lord Chief Justice at once , " said the Dwarf-King . 

The three culprits were left standing uneasily in a kind of cage . They
would have tried to speak , but every time they opened their mouths , one
of the guards gave them a dig in the ribs . 

For a space of five minutes there was quiet in the crowded throne-room , 
a quiet broken now and then by a veiled cough or the noise of shuffling
feet . Presently , from far away , came the clear , sweet call of silver
trumpets . 

 " He ' s coming ! He ' s coming ! " murmured many voices . A buzz of excitement
filled the room . Several people had to be revived with smelling salts . 

The trumpets sounded a second time . The excitement increased . 

The trumpets sounded a third time , near at hand . A man ' s voice announced
in solemn tones ,  " The Lord Chief Justice approaches . " 

The audience grew very still . Hardly a rustle or a flutter was heard . 
Suddenly the great tapestry curtains which overhung the door parted , and
there appeared , first of all , an usher , clad in red velvet and carrying
a golden wand; then came two golden-haired pages , also clad in red
velvet and carrying a flat black-lacquer box on a velvet cushion . Last
of all came an elderly man dressed in black , and carrying a golden perch
on which sat a fine green parrot . On reaching the centre of the hall , 
the parrot flapped its wings , arranged an upstart feather or two , and
then resumed that solemn dignity for which birds and animals are so
justly famous . 

With great ceremony the gentleman in black placed the Lord Chief Justice
on a lacquer stand close by the throne of the Dwarf-King . 

Trumpets sounded . Two servitors hurried forward with the captive King . 

 " Your Venerability , " spoke the Dwarf-King to the parrot , who watched him
intently out of its round yellow eye , and nodded its head ,  " this rascal
has been taken in the act of robbing the treasure castle . What
punishment do you suggest ? " 

At these words , the two golden-haired pages , advancing with immense
solemnity , lifted the lacquer box to within reach of the parrot ' s beak . 
The box was full of cards . Over them , swaying from one leg to the other
as he did so , the parrot swept his head . 

An icy silence fell over the throng . The King , the Chancellor , and the
Chamberlain quaked in their shoes . Presently the parrot picked out a
card , and the gentleman in black handed it to the Dwarf-King . 

 " Prisoner , " said the Dwarf-King to the other King ,  " the Lord Chief
Justice condemns you to be for the rest of your natural life Master
Sweeper of the Palace Chimneys . " 

Discreet applause was heard . The Chancellor was then hurried forward , 
and the bird picked out a second card . 

 " Prisoner , " said the Dwarf-King ,  " the Lord Chief Justice condemns you to
be for the rest of your natural life Master Washer of the Palace
Windows . " 

More discreet applause was heard . And now the Chamberlain was brought to
the bar . The parrot gave him quite a wicked eye , and hesitated for some
time before drawing a card . 

 " Prisoner , " said the Dwarf-King , reading the card which the parrot had
finally chosen ,  " the Lord Chief Justice condemns you for the rest of
your natural life to be Master Beater of the Palace Carpets . " 

Great applause followed this sage judgment . 

So the three rogues were led away , and unless you have heard to the
contrary , they are still making up for their wicked lives by enforced
diligence at their tasks . The palace has five hundred and ninety-six
chimneys , eight thousand , seven hundred and fifty-three windows , and
eleven hundred and ninety-nine large dust-gathering carpets , and the
chimneys , windows , and carpets have to be swept , washed , and beaten at
least once a week . 

Now when the King , the Chancellor , and the Chamberlain failed to return , 
the people took the hunter out of his prison and made him king , because
he was the richest and most powerful of them all . 

As for the treasure of the treasure castle , it is still there , packed in
the linen sacks , lying just inside the great door . 

Perhaps some day you may find it . If you do , don ' t be greedy , and don ' t
go up to the turret chamber . 

