 " Here ! " cried Alice , quite forgetting in the flurry of the moment how
large she had grown in the last few minutes , and she jumped up in such
a hurry that she tipped over the jury-box with the edge of her skirt , 
upsetting all the jurymen on to the heads of the crowd below , and
there they lay sprawling about , reminding her very much of a globe of
gold-fish she had accidentally upset the week before . 

 " Oh , I _beg_ your pardon ! " she exclaimed in a tone of great dismay , 
and began picking them up again as quickly as she could , for the
accident of the gold-fish kept running in her head , and she had a
vague sort of idea that they must be collected at once and put back
into the jury-box , or they would die . 

 " The trial cannot proceed , " said the King , in a very grave voice , 
 " until all the jurymen are back in their proper places--_all_ , " he
repeated with great emphasis , looking hard at Alice as he said so . 

Alice looked at the jury-box , and saw that , in her haste , she had put
the Lizard in head downward , and the poor little thing was waving its
tail about in a melancholy way , being quite unable to move . 

She soon got it out again , and put it right;  " not that it signifies
much , " she said to herself;  " I should think it would be _quite_ as
much use in the trial one way up as the other . " 

As soon as the jury had a little recovered from the shock of being
upset , and their slates and pencils had been found and handed back to
them , they set to work very diligently to write out a history of the
accident , all except the Lizard , who seemed too much overcome to do
anything but sit with its mouth open , gazing up into the roof of the
court . 

 " What do you know about this business ? " the King said to Alice . 

 " Nothing , " said Alice . 

 " Nothing _whatever_ ? " persisted the King . 

 " Nothing whatever , " said Alice . 

 " That ' s very important , " the King said , turning to the jury . They were
just beginning to write this down on their slates , when the White
Rabbit interrupted :  " _Un_important , your Majesty means , of course , " he
said , in a very respectful tone , but frowning and making faces at him
as he spoke . 

 " _Un_important , of course , I meant , " the King hastily said , and went on
to himself in an undertone ,  " important--unimportant--unimportant--important-- " 
as if he were trying which word sounded best . 

Some of the jury wrote it down  " important , " and some  " unimportant . " 

Alice could see this , as she was near enough to look over their
slates;  " but it doesn ' t matter a bit , " she thought to herself . 

At this moment the King , who had been for some time busily writing in
his note-book , called out ,  " Silence ! " and read out from his book , 
 " Rule Forty-two . _All persons more than a mile high to leave the
court_ . " 

Everybody looked at Alice . 

 " _I ' m_ not a mile high , " said Alice . 

 " You are , " said the King . 

 " Nearly two miles high , " added the Queen . 

 " Well , I shan ' t go , at any rate , " said Alice :  " besides , that ' s not a
regular rule : you invented it just now . " 

 " It ' s the oldest rule in the book , " said the King . 

 " Then it ought to be Number One , " said Alice . 

The King turned pale , and shut his note-book hastily . 

 " Consider your verdict , " he said to the jury , in a low trembling
voice . 

 " There ' s more evidence to come yet , please your Majesty , " said the
White Rabbit , jumping up in a great hurry :  " this paper has just been
picked up . " 

 " What ' s in it ? " said the Queen . 

 " I haven ' t opened it yet , " said the White Rabbit;  " but it seems to be
a letter , written by the prisoner to--to somebody . " 

 " It must have been that , " said the King ,  " unless it was written to
nobody , which isn ' t usual , you know . " 

 " Who is it directed to ? " said one of the jurymen . 

 " It isn ' t directed at all , " said the White Rabbit :  " in fact , there ' s
nothing written on the _outside_ . " He unfolded the paper as he spoke , 
and added ,  " It isn ' t a letter , after all : it ' s a set of verses . " 

 " Are they in the prisoner ' s handwriting ? " asked another of the
jurymen . 

 " No , they ' re not , " said the White Rabbit ,  " and that ' s the queerest
thing about it . "  ( The jury all looked puzzled . ) 

 " He must have imitated somebody else ' s hand , " said the King .  ( The jury
all brightened up again . ) 

 " Please your Majesty , " said the Knave ,  " I didn ' t write it , and they
can ' t prove that I did : there ' s no name signed at the end . " 

 " If you didn ' t sign it , " said the King ,  " that only makes the matter
worse . You _must_ have meant some mischief , or else you ' d have signed
your name like an honest man . " 

There was a general clapping of hands at this : it was the first really
clever thing the King had said that day . 

 " That _proves_ his guilt , of course , " said the Queen :  " so , off with-- " 

 " It doesn ' t prove anything of the sort ! " said Alice .  " Why , you don ' t
even know what they ' re about ! " 

 " Read them , " said the King . 

The White Rabbit put on his spectacles .  " Where shall I begin , please
your Majesty ? " he asked . 

 " Begin at the beginning , " the King said very gravely ,  " and go on till
you come to the end : then stop . " 

There was dead silence in the court , while the White Rabbit read out
these verses : 

 They told me you had been to her , 
 And mentioned me to him : 
 She gave me a good character , 
 But said I could not swim . 

 He sent them word I had not gone
  ( We know it to be true ) : 
 If she should push the matter on , 
 What would become of you ? 

 I gave her one , they gave him two , 
 You gave us three or more;
 They all returned from him to you , 
 Though they were mine before . 

 If I or she should chance to be
 Involved in this affair , 
 He trusts to you to set them free , 
 Exactly as we were . 

 My notion was that you had been
  ( Before she had this fit ) 
 An obstacle that came between
 Him , and ourselves , and it . 

 Don ' t let him know she liked them best , 
 For this must ever be
 A secret , kept from all the rest , 
 Between yourself and me . " 

 " That ' s the most important piece of evidence we ' ve heard yet , " said
the King , rubbing his hands;  " so now let the jury-- " 

 " If any one of them can explain it , " said Alice  ( she had grown so
large in the last few minutes that she wasn ' t a bit afraid of
interrupting him ) ,  " I ' ll give him sixpence . _I_ don ' t believe there ' s
an atom of meaning in it . " 

The jury all wrote down , on their slates ,  " _She_ doesn ' t believe
there ' s an atom of meaning in it , " but none of them attempted to
explain the paper . 

 " If there ' s no meaning in it , " said the King ,  " that saves a world of
trouble , you know , as we needn ' t try to find any . And yet I don ' t
know , " he went on , spreading out the verses on his knee , and looking
at them with one eye;  " I seem to see some meaning in them , after all . 
 ' --_said I could not swim_-- ' you can ' t swim , can you ? " he added , 
turning to the Knave . 

The Knave shook his head sadly . 

 " Do I look like it ? " he said .  ( Which he certainly did _not_ , being
made entirely of cardboard . ) 

 " All right , so far , " said the King; and he went on muttering over the
verses to himself :  " ' _We know it to be true_ ' --that ' s the jury , 
of course-- ' _If she should push the matter on_ ' --that must be the
Queen-- ' _What would become of you_ ? ' --What indeed ! -- ' _I gave
her one , they gave him two_ ' --why , that must be what he did with
the tarts , you know-- " 

 " But it goes on  ' _they all returned from him to you_ , ' " said
Alice . 

 " Why , there they are ! " said the King triumphantly , pointing to the
tarts on the table .  " Nothing can be clearer than _that_ . Then
again-- ' _before she had this fit_ ' --you never had _fits_ , my dear , 
I think ? " he said to the Queen . 

 " Never ! " said the Queen , furiously , throwing an inkstand at the Lizard
as she spoke .  ( The unfortunate little Bill had left off writing on his
slate with one finger , as he found it made no mark; but he now hastily
began again , using the ink , that was trickling down his face , as long
as it lasted . ) 

 " Then the words don ' t _fit_ you , " said the King; looking round
the court with a smile . There was a dead silence . 

 " It ' s a pun ! " the King added in an angry tone , and everybody laughed . 
 " Let the jury consider their verdict , " the King said , for about the
twentieth time that day . 

 " No , no ! " said the Queen .  " Sentence first--verdict afterward . " 

 " Stuff and nonsense ! " said Alice loudly .  " The idea of having the
sentence first ! " 

 " Hold your tongue ! " said the Queen , turning purple . 

 " I won ' t ! " said Alice . 

 " Off with her head ! " the Queen shouted at the top of her voice . Nobody
moved . 

 " Who cares for _you_ ? " said Alice  ( she had grown to her full size by
this time ) .  " You ' re nothing but a pack of cards ! " 

At this the whole pack rose up into the air , and came flying down upon
her; she gave a little scream , half of fright and half of anger , and
tried to beat them off , and found herself lying on the bank , with her
head in the lap of her sister , who was gently brushing away some dead
leaves that had fluttered down from the trees upon her face . 

 " Wake up , Alice dear ! " said her sister .  " Why , what a long sleep you ' ve
had ! " 

 " Oh , I ' ve had such a curious dream ! " said Alice . And she told her
sister , as well as she could remember them , all these strange
adventures of hers that you have just been reading about; and , when
she had finished , her sister kissed her , and said ,  " It _was_ a curious
dream , dear , certainly; but now run in to your tea : it ' s getting late . " 

So Alice got up and ran off , thinking while she ran , as well she
might , what a wonderful dream it had been . 

 * * * * *

But her sister sat still just as she left her , leaning her head on her
hand , watching the setting sun , and thinking of little Alice and all
her wonderful Adventures , till she too began dreaming after a fashion , 
and this was her dream : 

First , she dreamed about little Alice herself : once again the tiny
hands were clasped upon her knee , and the bright eager eyes were
looking into hers--she could hear the very tones of her voice , and see
that queer little toss of her head to keep back the wandering hair
that _would_ always get into her eyes--and still as she listened , or
seemed to listen , the whole place around her became alive with the
strange creatures of her little sister ' s dream . 

The long grass rustled at her feet as the White Rabbit hurried by--the
frightened Mouse splashed his way through the neighboring pool--she
could hear the rattle of the teacups as the March Hare and his friends
shared their never-ending meal , and the shrill voice of the Queen
ordering off her unfortunate guests to execution--once more the
pig-baby was sneezing on the Duchess ' knee , while plates and dishes
crashed around it--once more the shriek of the Gryphon , the squeaking
of the Lizard ' s slate-pencil , and the choking of the suppressed
guinea-pigs , filled the air , mixed up with the distant sob of the
miserable Mock Turtle . 

So she sat on , with closed eyes , and half believed herself in
Wonderland , though she knew she had but to open them again , and all
would change to dull reality--the grass would be only rustling in the
wind , and the pool rippling to the waving of the reeds--the rattling
teacups would change to tinkling sheep bells , and the Queen ' s shrill
cries to the voice of the shepherd-boy--and the sneeze of the baby , 
the shriek of the Gryphon , and all the other queer noises , would
change  ( she knew ) to the confused clamor of the busy farm-yard--while
the lowing of the cattle in the distance would take the place of the
Mock Turtle ' s heavy sobs . 

Lastly , she pictured to herself how this same little sister of hers
would , in the after-time , be herself a grown woman; and how she would
keep , through all her riper years , the simple and loving heart of her
childhood; and how she would gather about her other little children , 
and make _their_ eyes bright and eager with many a strange tale , 
perhaps even with the dream of Wonderland of long ago; and how she
would feel with all their simple sorrows , and find a pleasure in all
their simple joys , remembering her own child-life , and the happy
summer days . 
﻿
THE KINGDOM OF THE GREEDY

BY P . J . STAHL . 



The country of the Greedy , well known in history , was ruled by a king
who had much trouble . His subjects were well behaved , but they had one
sad fault : they were too fond of pies and tarts . It was as
disagreeable to them to swallow a spoonful of soup as if it were so
much sea water , and it would take a policeman to make them open their
mouths for a bit of meat , either boiled or roasted . This deplorable
taste made the fortunes of the pastry cooks , but also of the
apothecaries . Families ruined themselves in pills and powders;
camomile , rhubarb , and peppermint trebled in price , as well as other
disagreeable remedies , such as castor ---- which I will not name . 

The King of the Greedy sought long for the means of correcting this
fatal passion for sweets , but even the faculty were puzzled . 

 " Your Majesty , " said the great court doctor , Olibriers , at his last
audience ,  " your people look like putty ! They are incurable; their
senseless love for good eating will bring them all to the grave . " 

This view of things did not suit the King . He was wise , and saw very
plainly that a monarch without subjects would be but a sorry king . 

Happily , after this utter failure of the doctors , there came into the
mind of His Majesty a first-class idea : he telegraphed for Mother
Mitchel , the most celebrated of all pastry cooks . Mother Mitchel soon
arrived , with her black cat , Fanfreluche , who accompanied her
everywhere . He was an incomparable cat . He had not his equal as an
adviser and a taster of tarts . 

Mother Mitchel having respectfully inquired what she and her cat could
do for His Majesty , the King demanded of the astonished pastry cook a
tart as big as the capitol--bigger even , if possible , but no smaller ! 
When the King uttered this astounding order , deep emotion was shown by
the chamberlains , the pages , and lackeys . Nothing but the respect due
to his presence prevented them from crying  " Long live Your Majesty ! " 
in his very ears . But the King had seen enough of the enthusiasm of
the populace , and did not allow such sounds in the recesses of his
palace . 

The King gave Mother Mitchel one month to carry out his gigantic
project .  " It is enough , " she proudly replied , brandishing her crutch . 
Then , taking leave of the King , she and her cat set out for their
home . 

On the way Mother Mitchel arranged in her head the plan of the
monument which was to immortalize her , and considered the means of
executing it . As to its form and size , it was to be as exact a copy of
the capitol as possible , since the King had willed it; but its outside
crust should have a beauty all its own . The dome must be adorned with
sugarplums of all colours , and surmounted by a splendid crown of
macaroons , spun sugar , chocolate , and candied fruits . It was no small
affair . 

Mother Mitchel did not like to lose her time . Her plan of battle once
formed , she recruited on her way all the little pastry cooks of the
country , as well as all the tiny six-year-olds who had a sincere love
for the noble callings of scullion and apprentice . There were plenty
of these , as you may suppose , in the country of the Greedy; Mother
Mitchel had her pick of them . 

Mother Mitchel , with the help of her crutch and of Fanfreluche , who
miaowed loud enough to be heard twenty miles off , called upon all the
millers of the land , and commanded them to bring together at a certain
time as many sacks of fine flour as they could grind in a week . There
were only windmills in that country; you may easily believe how they
all began to go . B-r-r-r-r-r ! What a noise they made ! The clatter was
so great that all the birds flew away to other climes , and even the
clouds fled from the sky . 

At the call of Mother Mitchel all the farmers ' wives were set to work;
they rushed to the hencoops to collect the seven thousand fresh eggs
that Mother Mitchel wanted for her great edifice . Deep was the emotion
of the fowls . The hens were inconsolable , and the unhappy creatures
mourned upon the palings for the loss of all their hopes . 

The milkmaids were busy from morning till night in milking the cows . 
Mother Mitchel must have twenty thousand pails of milk . All the little
calves were put on half rations . This great work was nothing to them , 
and they complained pitifully to their mothers . Many of the cows
protested with energy against this unreasonable tax , which made their
young families so uncomfortable . There were pails upset , and even some
milkmaids went head over heels . But these little accidents did not
chill the enthusiasm of the labourers . 

And now Mother Mitchel called for a thousand pounds of the best
butter . All the churns for twenty miles around began to work in the
most lively manner . Their dashers dashed without ceasing , keeping
perfect time . The butter was tasted , rolled into pats , wrapped up , and
put into baskets . Such energy had never been known before . 

Mother Mitchel passed for a sorceress . It was all because of her cat , 
Fanfreluche , with whom she had mysterious doings and pantomimes , and
with whom she talked in her inspired moments , as if he were a real
person . Certainly , since the famous  " Puss in Boots , " there had never
been an animal so extraordinary; and credulous folks suspected him of
being a magician . Some curious people had the courage to ask
Fanfreluche if this were true; but he had replied by bristling , and
showing his teeth and claws so fiercely , that the conversation had
ended there . Sorceress or not , Mother Mitchel was always obeyed . No
one else was ever served so punctually . 

On the appointed day all the millers arrived with their asses trotting
in single file , each laden with a great sack of flour . Mother Mitchel , 
after having examined the quality of the flour , had every sack
accurately weighed . This was head work and hard work , and took time;
but Mother Mitchel was untiring , and her cat , also , for while the
operation lasted he sat on the roof watching . It is only just to say
that the millers of the Greedy Kingdom brought flour not only
faultless but of full weight . They knew that Mother Mitchel was not
joking when she said that others must be as exact with her as she was
with them . Perhaps also they were a little afraid of the cat , whose
great green eyes were always shining upon them like two round lamps , 
and never lost sight of them for one moment . 

All the farmers ' wives arrived in turn , with baskets of eggs upon
their heads . They did not load their donkeys with them , for fear that
in jogging along they would become omelettes on the way . Mother
Mitchel received them with her usual gravity . She had the patience to
look through every egg to see if it were fresh . 

She did not wish to run the risk of having young chickens in a tart
that was destined for those who could not bear the taste of any meat
however tender and delicate . The number of eggs was complete , and
again Mother Mitchel and her cat had nothing to complain of . This
Greedy nation , though carried away by love of good eating , was
strictly honest . It must be said that where nations are patriotic , 
desire for the common good makes them unselfish . Mother Mitchel ' s tart
was to be the glory of the country , and each one was proud to
contribute to such a great work . 

And now the milkmaids with their pots and pails of milk , and the
buttermakers with their baskets filled with the rich yellow pats of
butter , filed in long procession to the right and left of the cabin of
Mother Mitchel . There was no need for her to examine so carefully the
butter and the milk . She had such a delicate nose that if there had
been a single pat of ancient butter or a pail of sour milk she would
have pounced upon it instantly . But all was perfectly fresh . In that
golden age they did not understand the art , now so well known , of
making milk out of flour and water . Real milk was necessary to make
cheesecakes and ice cream and other delicious confections much adored
in the Greedy Kingdom . If any one had made such a despicable
discovery , he would have been chased from the country as a public
nuisance . 

Then came the grocers , with their aprons of coffee bags , and with the
jolly , mischievous faces the rogues always have . Each one clasped to
his heart a sugar loaf nearly as large as himself , whose summit , 
without its paper cap , looked like new-fallen snow upon a pyramid . 
Mother Mitchel , with her crutch for a baton , saw them all placed in
her storerooms upon shelves put up for the purpose . She had to be
very strict , for some of the little fellows could hardly part from
their merchandise , and many were indiscreet , with their tongues behind
their great mountains of sugar . If they had been let alone , they would
never have stopped till the sugar was all gone . But they had not
thought of the implacable eye of old Fanfreluche , who , posted upon a
water spout , took note of all their misdeeds . From another quarter
came a whole army of country people , rolling wheelbarrows and carrying
huge baskets , all filled with cherries , plums , peaches , apples , and
pears . All these fruits were so fresh , in such perfect condition , with
their fair shining skins , that they looked like wax or painted marble , 
but their delicious perfume proved that they were real . Some little
people , hidden in the corners , took pains to find this out . Between
ourselves , Mother Mitchel made believe not to see them , and took the
precaution of holding Fanfreluche in her arms so that he could not
spring upon them . The fruits were all put into bins , each kind by
itself . And now the preparations were finished . There was no time to
lose before setting to work . 

The spot which Mother Mitchel had chosen for her great edifice was a
pretty hill on which a plateau formed a splendid site . This hill
commanded the capital city , built upon the slope of another hill close
by . After having beaten down the earth till it was as smooth as a
floor , they spread over it loads of bread crumbs , brought from the
baker ' s , and levelled it with rake and spade , as we do gravel in our
garden walks . Little birds , as greedy as themselves , came in flocks to
the feast , but they might eat as they liked , it would never be missed , 
so thick was the carpet . It was a great chance for the bold little
things . 

All the ingredients for the tart were now ready . Upon order of Mother
Mitchel they began to peel the apples and pears and to take out the
pips . The weather was so pleasant that the girls sat out of doors , 
upon the ground , in long rows . The sun looked down upon them with a
merry face . Each of the little workers had a big earthen pan , and
peeled incessantly the apples which the boys brought them . When the
pans were full , they were carried away and others were brought . They
had also to carry away the peels , or the girls would have been buried
in them . Never was there such a peeling before . 

Not far away , the children were stoning the plums , cherries , and
peaches . This work , being the easiest , was given to the youngest and
most inexperienced hands , which were all first carefully washed , for
Mother Mitchel , though not very particular about her own toilet , was
very neat in her cooking . The schoolhouse , long unused  ( for in the
country of the Greedy they had forgotten everything ) , was arranged for
this second class of workers , and the cat was their inspector . He
walked round and round , growling if he saw the fruit popping into any
of the little mouths . If they had dared , how they would have pelted
him with plum stones ! But no one risked it . Fanfreluche was not to be
trifled with . 

In those days powdered sugar had not been invented , and to grate it
all was no small affair . It was the work that the grocers used to
dislike the most; both lungs and arms were soon tired . But Mother
Mitchel was there to sustain them with her unequalled energy . She
chose the labourers from the most robust of the boys . With mallet and
knife she broke the cones into round pieces , and they grated them till
they were too small to hold . The bits were put into baskets to be
pounded . One would never have expected to find all the thousand pounds
of sugar again . But a new miracle was wrought by Mother Mitchel . It
was all there ! 

It was then the turn of the ambitious scullions to enter the lists and
break the seven thousand eggs for Mother Mitchel . It was not hard to
break them--any fool could do that; but to separate adroitly the yolks
and the whites demands some talent , and , above all , great care . We
dare not say that there were no accidents here , no eggs too well
scrambled , no baskets upset . But the experience of Mother Mitchel had
counted upon such things , and it may truly be said that there were
never so many eggs broken at once , or ever could be again . To make an
omelette of them would have taken a saucepan as large as a skating
pond , and the fattest cook that ever lived could not hold the handle
of such a saucepan . 

But this was not all . Now that the yolks and whites were once divided , 
they must each be beaten separately in wooden bowls , to give them the
necessary lightness . The egg beaters were marshalled into two
brigades , the yellow and the white . Every one preferred the white , for
it was much more amusing to make those snowy masses that rose up so
high than to beat the yolks , which knew no better than to mix together
like so much sauce . Mother Mitchel , with her usual wisdom , had avoided
this difficulty by casting lots . Thus , those who were not on the white
side had no reason to complain of oppression . And truly , when all was
done , the whites and the yellows were equally tired . All had cramps in
their hands . 

Now began the real labour of Mother Mitchel . Till now she had been the
commander-in-chief--the head only; now she put her own finger in the
pie . First , she had to make sweetmeats and jam out of all the immense
quantity of fruit she had stored . For this , as she could only do one
kind at a time , she had ten kettles , each as big as a dinner table . 
During forty-eight hours the cooking went on; a dozen scullions blew
the fire and put on the fuel . Mother Mitchel , with a spoon that four
modern cooks could hardly lift , never ceased stirring and trying the
boiling fruit . Three expert tasters , chosen from the most dainty , had
orders to report progress every half hour . 

It is unnecessary to state that all the sweetmeats were perfectly
successful , or that they were of exquisite consistency , colour , and
perfume . With Mother Mitchel there was no such word as _fail_ . When
each kind of sweetmeat was finished , she skimmed it , and put it away
to cool in enormous bowls before potting . She did not use for this the
usual little glass or earthen jars , but great stone ones , like those
in the  " Forty Thieves . " Not only did these take less time to fill , but
they were safe from the children . The scum and the scrapings were
something , to be sure . But there was little Toto , who thought this was
not enough . He would have jumped into one of the bowls if they had not
held him . 

Mother Mitchel , who thought of everything , had ordered two hundred
great kneading troughs , wishing that all the utensils of this great
work should be perfectly new . These two hundred troughs , like her
other materials , were all delivered punctually and in good order . The
pastry cooks rolled up their sleeves and began to knead the dough with
cries of  " Hi ! Hi ! " that could be heard for miles . It was odd to see
this army of bakers in serried ranks , all making the same gestures at
once , like well-disciplined soldiers , stooping and rising together in
time , so that a foreign ambassador wrote to his court that he wished
his people could load and fire as well as these could knead . Such
praise a people never forgets . 

When each troughful of paste was approved it was moulded with care
into the form of bricks , and with the aid of the engineer-in-chief , a
young genius who had gained the first prize in the school of
architecture , the majestic edifice was begun . Mother Mitchel herself
drew the plan; in following her directions , the young engineer showed
himself modest beyond all praise . He had the good sense to understand
that the architecture of tarts and pies had rules of its own , and that
therefore the experience of Mother Mitchel was worth all the
scientific theories in the world . 

The inside of the monument was divided into as many compartments as
there were kinds of fruits . The walls were no less than four feet
thick . When they were finished , twenty-four ladders were set up , and
twenty-four experienced cooks ascended them . These first-class artists
were each of them armed with an enormous cooking spoon . Behind them , 
on the lower rounds of the ladders , followed the kitchen boys , 
carrying on their heads pots and pans filled to the brim with jam and
sweetmeats , each sort ready to be poured into its destined
compartment . This colossal labour was accomplished in one day , and
with wonderful exactness . 

When the sweetmeats were used to the last drop , when the great spoons
had done all their work , the twenty-four cooks descended to earth
again . The intrepid Mother Mitchel , who had never quitted the spot , 
now ascended , followed by the noble Fanfreluche , and dipped her finger
into each of the compartments , to assure herself that everything was
right . This part of her duty was not disagreeable , and many of the
scullions would have liked to perform it . But they might have lingered
too long over the enchanting task . As for Mother Mitchel , she had been
too well used to sweets to be excited now . She only wished to do her
duty and to insure success . 

All went on well . Mother Mitchel had given her approbation . Nothing
was needed now but to crown the sublime and delicious edifice by
placing upon it the crust--that is , the roof , or dome . This delicate
operation was confided to the engineer-in-chief who now showed his
superior genius . The dome , made beforehand of a single piece , was
raised in the air by means of twelve balloons , whose force of
ascension had been carefully calculated . First it was directed , by
ropes , exactly over the top of the tart; then at the word of command
it gently descended upon the right spot . It was not a quarter of an
inch out of place . This was a great triumph for Mother Mitchel and her
able assistant . 

But all was not over . How should this colossal tart be cooked ? That
was the question that agitated all the people of the Greedy country , 
who came in crowds--lords and commons--to gaze at the wonderful
spectacle . 

Some of the envious or ill-tempered declared it would be impossible to
cook the edifice which Mother Mitchel had built; and the doctors were , 
no one knows why , the saddest of all . Mother Mitchel , smiling at the
general bewilderment , mounted the summit of the tart; she waved her
crutch in the air , and while her cat miaowed in his sweetest voice , 
suddenly there issued from the woods a vast number of masons , drawing
wagons of well-baked bricks , which they had prepared in secret . This
sight silenced the ill-wishers and filled the hearts of the Greedy
with hope . 

In two days an enormous furnace was built around and above the
colossal tart , which found itself shut up in an immense earthen pot . 
Thirty huge mouths , which were connected with thousands of winding
pipes for conducting heat all over the building , were soon choked with
fuel , by the help of two hundred charcoal burners , who , obeying a
private signal , came forth in long array from the forest , each
carrying his sack of coal . Behind them stood Mother Mitchel with a box
of matches , ready to fire each oven as it was filled . Of course the
kindlings had not been forgotten , and was all soon in a blaze . 

When the fire was lighted in the thirty ovens , when they saw the
clouds of smoke rolling above the dome , that announced that the
cooking had begun , the joy of the people was boundless . Poets
improvised odes , and musicians sung verses without end , in honour of
the superb prince who had been inspired to feed his people in so
dainty a manner , when other rulers could not give them enough even of
dry bread . The names of Mother Mitchel and of the illustrious engineer
were not forgotten in this great glorification . Next to His Majesty , 
they were certainly the first of mankind , and their names were worthy
of going down with his to the remotest posterity . 

All the envious ones were thunderstruck . They tried to console
themselves by saying that the work was not yet finished , and that an
accident might happen at the last moment . But they did not really
believe a word of this . Notwithstanding all their efforts to look
cheerful , it had to be acknowledged that the cooking was possible . 
Their last resource was to declare the tart a bad one , but that would
be biting off their own noses . As for declining to eat it , envy could
never go so far as that in the country of the Greedy . 

After two days , the unerring nose of Mother Mitchel discovered that
the tart was cooked to perfection . The whole country was perfumed with
its delicious aroma . Nothing more remained but to take down the
furnaces . Mother Mitchel made her official announcement to His
Majesty , who was delighted , and complimented her upon her punctuality . 
One day was still wanting to complete the month . During this time the
people gave their eager help to the engineer in the demolition , 
wishing to have a hand in the great national work and to hasten the
blessed moment . In the twinkling of an eye the thing was done . The
bricks were taken down one by one , counted carefully , and carried into
the forest again , to serve for another occasion . 

The TART , unveiled , appeared at last in all its majesty and splendour . 
The dome was gilded , and reflected the rays of the sun in the most
dazzling manner . The wildest excitement and rapture ran through the
land of the Greedy . Each one sniffed with open nostrils the appetizing
perfume . Their mouths watered , their eyes filled with tears , they
embraced , pressed each other ' s hands , and indulged in touching
pantomimes . Then the people of town and country , united by one
rapturous feeling , joined hands , and danced in a ring around the
grand confection . 

No one dared to touch the tart before the arrival of His Majesty . 
Meanwhile , something must be done to allay the universal impatience , 
and they resolved to show Mother Mitchel the gratitude with which all
hearts were filled . She was crowned with the laurel of _conquerors_ , 
which is also the laurel of _sauce_ , thus serving a double purpose . 
Then they placed her , with her crutch and her cat , upon a sort of
throne , and carried her all round her vast work . Before her marched
all the musicians of the town , dancing , drumming , fifing , and tooting
upon all instruments , while behind her pressed an enthusiastic crowd , 
who rent the air with their plaudits and filled it with a shower of
caps . Her fame was complete , and a noble pride shone on her
countenance . 

The royal procession arrived . A grand stairway had been built , so that
the King and his ministers could mount to the summit of this
monumental tart . Thence the King , amid a deep silence , thus addressed
his people : 

 " My children , " said he ,  " you adore tarts . You despise all other food . 
If you could , you would even eat tarts in your sleep . Very well . Eat
as much as you like . Here is one big enough to satisfy you . But know
this , that while there remains a single crumb of this august tart , 
from the height of which I am proud to look down on you , all other
food is forbidden you on pain of death . While you are here , I have
ordered all the pantries to be emptied , and all the butchers , bakers , 
pork and milk dealers , and fishmongers to shut up their shops . Why
leave them open ? Why indeed ? Have you not here at discretion what you
love best , and enough to last you ever , _ever_ so long ? Devote
yourselves to it with all your hearts . I do not wish you to be bored
with the sight of any other food . 

 " Greedy ones ! behold your TART ! " 

What enthusiastic applause , what frantic hurrahs rent the air , in
answer to this eloquent speech from the throne ! 

 " Long live the King , Mother Mitchel , and her cat ! Long live the tart ! 
Down with soup ! Down with bread ! To the bottom of the sea with all
beefsteaks , mutton chops , and roasts ! " 

Such cries came from every lip . Old men gently stroked their chops , 
children patted their little stomachs , the crowd licked its thousand
lips with eager joy . Even the babies danced in their nurses ' arms , so
precocious was the passion for tarts in this singular country . Grave
professors , skipping like kids , declaimed Latin verses in honour of
His Majesty and Mother Mitchel , and the shyest young girls opened
their mouths like the beaks of little birds . As for the doctors , they
felt a joy beyond expression . They had reflected . They understood . 
But--my friends ! --

At last the signal was given . A detachment of the engineer corps
arrived , armed with pick and cutlass , and marched in good order to the
assault . A breach was soon opened , and the distribution began . The
King smiled at the opening in the tart; though vast , it hardly showed
more than a mouse hole in the monstrous wall . 

The King stroked his beard grandly .  " All goes well , " said he ,  " for him
who knows how to wait . " 

Who can tell how long the feast would have lasted if the King had not
given his command that it should cease ? Once more they expressed their
gratitude with cries so stifled that they resembled grunts , and then
rushed to the river . Never had a nation been so besmeared . Some were
daubed to the eyes , others had their ears and hair all sticky . As for
the little ones , they were marmalade from head to foot . When they had
finished their toilets , the river ran all red and yellow and was
sweetened for several hours , to the great surprise of all the fishes . 

Before returning home , the people presented themselves before the King
to receive his commands . 

 " Children ! " said he ,  " the feast will begin again exactly at six
o ' clock . Give time to wash the dishes and change the tablecloths , and
you may once more give yourselves over to pleasure . You shall feast
twice a day as long as the tart lasts . Do not forget . Yes ! if there is
not enough in this one , I will even order ANOTHER from Mother Mitchel;
for you know that great woman is indefatigable . Your happiness is my
only aim . "  ( Marks of universal joy and emotion . )  " You understand ? 
Noon , and six o ' clock ! There is no need for me to say be punctual ! Go , 
then , my children--be happy ! " 

The second feast was as gay as the first , and as long . A pleasant walk
in the suburbs--first exercise--then a nap , had refreshed their
appetites and unlimbered their jaws . But the King fancied that the
breach made in the tart was a little smaller than that of the morning . 

 " ' Tis well ! " said he ,  " ' tis well ! Wait till to-morrow , my friends;
yes , till day after to-morrow , and _next week_ ! " 

The next day the feast still went on gayly; yet at the evening meal
the King noticed some empty seats . 

 " Why is this ? " said he , with pretended indifference , to the court
physician . 

 " Your Majesty , " said the great Olibriers ,  " a few weak stomachs; that
is all . " 

On the next day there were larger empty spaces . The enthusiasm visibly
abated . The eighth day the crowd had diminished one half; the ninth , 
three quarters; the tenth day , of the thousand who came at first , only
two hundred remained; on the eleventh day only one hundred; and on the
twelfth--alas ! who would have thought it ? --a single one answered to
the call . Truly he was big enough . His body resembled a hogshead , his
mouth an oven , and his lips--we dare not say what . He was known in the
town by the name of Patapouf . They dug out a fresh lump for him from
the middle of the tart . It quickly vanished in his vast interior , and
he retired with great dignity , proud to maintain the honour of his
name and the glory of the Greedy Kingdom . 

But the next day , even he , the very last , appeared no more . The
unfortunate Patapouf had succumbed , and , like all the other
inhabitants of the country , was in a very bad way . In short , it was
soon known that the whole town had suffered agonies that night from
too much tart . Let us draw a veil over those hours of torture . Mother
Mitchel was in despair . Those ministers who had not guessed the secret
dared not open their lips . All the city was one vast hospital . No one
was seen in the streets but doctors and apothecaries ' boys , running
from house to house in frantic haste . It was dreadful ! Doctor
Olibriers was nearly knocked out . As for the King , he held his tongue
and shut himself up in his palace , but a secret joy shone in his eyes , 
to the wonder of every one . He waited three days without a word . 

The third day , the King said to his ministers : 

 " Let us go now and see how my poor people are doing , and feel their
pulse a little . " 

The good King went to every house , without forgetting a single one . He
visited small and great , rich and poor . 

 " Oh , oh ! Your Majesty , " said all ,  " the tart was good , but may we never
see it again ! Plague on that tart ! Better were dry bread . Your
Majesty , for mercy ' s sake , a little dry bread ! Oh , a morsel of dry
bread , how good it would be ! " 

 " No , indeed , " replied the King .  " _There is more of that tart ! _ " 

 " What ! Your Majesty , _must_ we eat it all ? " 

 " You _must_ ! " sternly replied the King;  " you _MUST_ ! By the immortal
beefsteaks ! not one of you shall have a slice of bread , and not a loaf
shall be baked in the kingdom while there remains a crumb of that
excellent tart ! " 

 " What misery ! " thought these poor people .  " That tart forever ! " 

The sufferers were in despair . There was only one cry through all the
town :  " Ow ! ow ! ow ! " For even the strongest and most courageous were in
horrible agonies . They twisted , they writhed , they lay down , they got
up . Always the inexorable colic . The dogs were not happier than their
masters; even they had too much tart . 

The spiteful tart looked in at all the windows . Built upon a height , 
it commanded the town . The mere sight of it made everybody ill , and
its former admirers had nothing but curses for it now . Unhappily , 
nothing they could say or do made it any smaller; still formidable , it
was a frightful joke for those miserable mortals . Most of them buried
their heads in their pillows , drew their nightcaps over their eyes , 
and lay in bed all day to shut out the sight of it . But this would not
do; they knew , they felt it was there . It was a nightmare , a horrible
burden , a torturing anxiety . 

In the midst of this terrible consternation the King remained
inexorable during eight days . His heart bled for his people , but the
lesson must sink deep if it were to bear fruit in future . When their
pains were cured , little by little , through fasting alone , and his
subjects pronounced these trembling words ,  " We are hungry ! " the King
sent them trays laden with--the inevitable tart . 

 " Ah ! " cried they , with anguish ,  " the tart again ! Always the tart , and
nothing but the tart ! Better were death ! " 

A few , who were almost famished , shut their eyes , and tried to eat a
bit of the detested food; but it was all in vain--they could not
swallow a mouthful . 

At length came the happy day when the King , thinking their punishment
had been severe enough and could never be forgotten , believed them at
length cured of their greediness . That day he ordered Mother Mitchel
to make in one of her colossal pots a super-excellent soup of which a
bowl was sent to every family . They received it with as much rapture
as the Hebrews did the manna in the desert . They would gladly have had
twice as much , but after their long fast it would not have been
prudent . It was a proof that they had learned something already , that
they understood this . 

The next day , more soup . This time the King allowed slices of bread in
it . How this good soup comforted all the town ! The next day there was
a little more bread in it and a little soup meat . Then for a few days
the kind Prince gave them roast beef and vegetables . The cure was
complete . 

The joy over this new diet was as great as ever had been felt for the
tart . It promised to last longer . They were sure to sleep soundly , and
to wake refreshed . It was pleasant to see in every house tables
surrounded with happy , rosy faces , and laden with good nourishing
food . 

The Greedy people never fell back into their old ways . Their once
puffed-out , sallow faces shone with health; they became , not fat , but
muscular , ruddy , and solid . The butchers and bakers reopened their
shops; the pastry cooks and confectioners shut theirs . The country of
the Greedy was turned upside down , and if it kept its name , it was
only from habit . As for the tart , it was forgotten . To-day , in that
marvellous country , there cannot be found a paper of sugarplums or a
basket of cakes . It is charming to see the red lips and the beautiful
teeth of the people . If they have still a king , he may well be proud
to be their ruler . 

Does this story teach that tarts and pies should never be eaten ? No;
but there is reason in all things . 

The doctors alone did not profit by this great revolution . They could
not afford to drink wine any longer in a land where indigestion had
become unknown . The apothecaries were no less unhappy , spiders spun
webs over their windows , and their horrible remedies were no longer of
use . 

Ask no more about Mother Mitchel . She was ridiculed without measure by
those who had adored her . To complete her misfortune , she lost her
cat . Alas for Mother Mitchel ! 

The King received the reward of his wisdom . His grateful people called
him neither Charles the Bold , nor Peter the Terrible , nor Louis the
Great , but always by the noble name of Prosper I , the Reasonable . 




THANKFUL[1]

BY MARY E . WILKINS FREEMAN . 

 This tale is evidence that Mrs . Freeman understands the
 children of New England as well as she knows their parents . 
 There is a doll in the story , but boys will not mind this as
 there are also two turkey-gobblers and a pewter dish full of
 Revolutionary bullets . 


Submit Thompson sat on the stone wall; Sarah Adams , an erect , prim
little figure , ankle-deep in dry grass , stood beside it , holding
Thankful . Thankful was about ten inches long , made of the finest
linen , with little rosy cheeks , and a fine little wig of flax . She
wore a blue wool frock and a red cloak . Sarah held her close . She even
drew a fold of her own blue homespun blanket around her to shield her
from the November wind . The sky was low and gray; the wind blew from
the northeast , and had the breath of snow in it . Submit on the wall
drew her quilted petticoats close down over her feet , and huddled
herself into a small space , but her face gleamed keen and resolute out
of the depths of a great red hood that belonged to her mother . Her
eyes were fixed upon a turkey-gobbler ruffling and bobbing around the
back door of the Adams house . The two gambrel-roofed Thompson and
Adams houses were built as close together as if the little village of
Bridgewater were a city . Acres of land stretched behind them and at
the other sides , but they stood close to the road , and close to each
other . The narrow space between them was divided by a stone wall which
was Submit ' s and Sarah ' s trysting-place . They met there every day and
exchanged confidences . They loved each other like sisters--neither of
them had an own sister--but to-day a spirit of rivalry had arisen . 

[ 1 : From _Harper ' s Young People_ , November 25 , 1890 . ]

The tough dry blackberry vines on the wall twisted around Submit; she
looked , with her circle of red petticoat , like some strange late
flower blooming out on the wall .  " I know he don ' t , Sarah Adams , " said
she . 

 " Father said he ' d weigh twenty pounds , " returned Sarah , in a small , 
weak voice , which still had persistency in it . 

 " I don ' t believe he will . Our Thanksgiving turkey is twice as big . You
know he is , Sarah Adams . " 

 " No , I don ' t , Submit Thompson . " 

 " Yes , you do . " 

Sarah lowered her chin , and shook her head with a decision that was
beyond words . She was a thin , delicate-looking little girl , her small
blue-clad figure bent before the wind , but there was resolution in her
high forehead and her sharp chin . 

Submit nodded violently . 

Sarah shook her head again . She hugged Thankful , and shook her head , 
with her eyes still staring defiantly into Submit ' s hood . 

Submit ' s black eyes in the depths of it were like two sparks . She
nodded vehemently; the gesture was not enough for her; she nodded and
spoke together .  " Sarah Adams , " said she ,  " what will you give me if our
turkey is bigger than your turkey ? " 

 " It ain ' t . " 

 " What will you give me if it is ? " 

Sarah stared at Submit .  " I don ' t know what you mean , Submit Thompson , " 
said she , with a stately and puzzled air . 

 " Well , I ' ll tell you . If your turkey weighs more than ours I ' ll give
you--I ' ll give you my little work-box with the picture on the top , and
if our turkey weighs more than yours you give me--What will you give
me , Sarah Adams ? " 

Sarah hung her flaxen head with a troubled air .  " I don ' t know , " said
she .  " I don ' t believe I ' ve got anything mother would be willing to
have me give away . " 

 " There ' s Thankful . Your mother wouldn ' t care if you gave her away . " 

Sarah started , and hugged Thankful closer .  " Yes , my mother would care , 
too , " said she .  " Don ' t you know my Aunt Rose from Boston made her and
gave her to me ? " 

Sarah ' s beautiful young Aunt Rose from Boston was the special
admiration of both the little girls . Submit was ordinarily impressed
by her name , but now she took it coolly . 

 " What if she did ? " she returned .  " She can make another . It ' s just
made out of a piece of old linen , anyhow . My work-box is real
handsome; but you can do just as you are a mind to . " 

 " Do you mean I can have the work-box to keep ? " inquired Sarah . 

 " Course I do , if your turkey ' s bigger . " 

Sarah hesitated .  " Our turkey is bigger anyhow , " she murmured .  " Don ' t
you think I ought to ask mother , Submit ? " she inquired suddenly . 

 " No ! What for ? I don ' t see anything to ask your mother for . She won ' t
care anything about that rag doll . " 

 " Ain ' t you going to ask your mother about the work-box ? " 

 " No , " replied Submit stoutly .  " It ' s mine; my grandmother gave it to
me . " 

Sarah reflected .  " I _know_ our turkey is the biggest , " she said , 
looking lovingly at Thankful , as if to justify herself to her .  " Well , 
I don ' t care , " she added , finally . 

 " Will you ? " 

 " Yes . " 

 " When ' s yours going to be killed ? " 

 " This afternoon . " 

 " So ' s ours . Then we ' ll find out . " 

Sarah tucked Thankful closer under her shawl .  " I know our turkey is
biggest , " said she . She looked very sober , although her voice was
defiant . Just then the great turkey came swinging through the yard . He
held up his head proudly and gobbled . His every feather stood out in
the wind . He seemed enormous--a perfect giant among turkeys .  " _Look_
at him ! " said Sarah , edging a little closer to the wall; she was
rather afraid of him . 

 " He ain ' t half so big as ours , " returned Submit , stoutly; but her
heart sank . The Thompson turkey did look very large . 

 " Submit ! Submit ! " called a voice from the Thompson house . 

Submit slowly got down from the wall .  " His feathers are a good deal
thicker than ours , " she said , defiantly , to Sarah . 

 " Submit , " called the voice ,  " come right home ! I want you to pare
apples for the pies . Be quick ! " 

 " Yes , marm , " Submit answered back , in a shrill voice;  " I ' m coming ! " 
Then she went across the yard and into the kitchen door of the
Thompson house , like a red robin into a nest . Submit had been taught
to obey her mother promptly . Mrs . Thompson was a decided woman . 

Sarah looked after Submit , then she gathered Thankful closer , and also
went into the house . Her mother , as well as Mrs . Thompson , was
preparing for Thanksgiving . The great kitchen was all of a pleasant
litter with pie plates and cake pans and mixing bowls , and full of
warm , spicy odours . The oven in the chimney was all heated and ready
for a batch of apple and pumpkin pies . Mrs . Adams was busy sliding
them in , but she stopped to look at Sarah and Thankful . Sarah was her
only child . 

 " Why , what makes you look so sober ? " said she . 

 " Nothing , " replied Sarah . She had taken off her blanket , and sat in
one of the straight-backed kitchen chairs , holding Thankful . 

 " You look dreadful sober , " said her mother .  " Are you tired ? " 

 " No , marm . " 

 " I ' m afraid you ' ve got cold standing out there in the wind . Do you
feel chilly ? " 

 " No , marm . Mother , how much do you suppose our turkey weighs ? " 

 " I believe father said he ' d weigh about twenty pounds . You are sure
you don ' t feel chilly ? " 

 " No , marm . Mother , do you suppose our turkey weighs more than
Submit ' s ? " 

 " How do you suppose I can tell ? I ain ' t set eyes on their turkey
lately . If you feel well , you ' d better sit up to the table and stone
that bowl of raisins . Put your dolly away , and get your apron . " 

But Sarah stoned raisins with Thankful in her lap , hidden under her
apron . She was so full of anxiety that she could not bear to put her
away . Suppose the Thompson turkey should be larger , and she should
lose Thankful--Thankful that her beautiful Aunt Rose had made for her ? 

Submit , over in the Thompson house , had sat down at once to her apple
paring . She had not gone into the best room to look at the work-box
whose possession she had hazarded . It stood in there on the table , 
made of yellow satiny wood , with a sliding lid ornamented with a
beautiful little picture . Submit had a certain pride in it , but her
fear of losing it was not equal to her hope of possessing Thankful . 
Submit had never had a doll , except a few plebeian ones , manufactured
secretly out of corncobs , whom it took more imagination than she
possessed to admire . 

Gradually all emulation over the turkeys was lost in the naughty
covetousness of her little friend and neighbour ' s doll . Submit felt
shocked and guilty , but she sat there paring the Baldwin apples , and
thinking to herself :  " If our turkey is only bigger , if it only is , 
then--I shall have Thankful . " Her mouth was pursed up and her eyes
snapped . She did not talk at all , but pared very fast . 

Her mother looked at her .  " If you don ' t take care , you ' ll cut your
fingers , " said she .  " You are in too much of a hurry . I suppose you
want to get out and gossip with Sarah again at the wall , but I can ' t
let you waste any more time to-day . There , I told you you would ! " 

Submit had cut her thumb quite severely . She choked a little when her
mother tied it up , and put on some balm of Gilead , which made it smart
worse . 

 " Don ' t cry ! " said her mother .  " You ' ll have to bear more than a cut
thumb if you live . " 

And Submit did not let the tears fall . She came from a brave race . Her
great-grandfather had fought in the Revolution; his sword and
regimentals were packed in the fine carved chest in the best room . 
Over the kitchen shelf hung an old musket with which her
great-grandmother , guarding her home and children , had shot an Indian . 
In a little closet beside the chimney was an old pewter dish full of
homemade Revolutionary bullets , which Submit and her brothers had for
playthings . A little girl who played with Revolutionary bullets ought
not to cry over a cut thumb . 

Submit finished paring the apples after her thumb was tied up , 
although she was rather awkward about it . Then she pounded spices in
the mortar , and picked over cranberries . Her mother kept her busy
every minute until dinnertime . When Submit ' s father and her two
brothers , Thomas and Jonas , had come in , she began on the subject
nearest her heart . 

 " Father , " said she ,  " how much do you think our Thanksgiving turkey
will weigh ? " 

Mr . Thompson was a deliberate man . He looked at her a minute before
replying .  " Seventeen or eighteen pounds , " replied he . 

 " Oh , Father ! don ' t you think he will weigh twenty ? " Mr . Thompson shook
his head . 

 " He don ' t begin to weigh so much as the Adams ' turkey , " said Jonas . 
 " Their turkey weighs twenty pounds . " 

 " Oh , Thomas ! do you think their turkey weighs more than ours ? " cried
Submit . 

Thomas was her elder brother; he had a sober , judicial air like his
father .  " Their turkey weighs considerable more than ours , " said he . 

Submit ' s face fell . 

 " You are not showing a right spirit , " said her mother , severely .  " Why
should you care if the Adams ' turkey does weigh more ? I am ashamed of
you ! " 

Submit said no more . She ate her dinner soberly . Afterward she wiped
dishes while her mother washed . All the time she was listening . Her
father and brothers had gone out; presently she started .  " Oh , Mother , 
they ' re killing the turkey ! " said she . 

 " Well , don ' t stop while the dishes are hot , if they are , " returned her
mother . 

Submit wiped obediently , but as soon as the dishes were set away , she
stole out in the barn where her father and brothers were picking the
turkey . 

 " Father , when are you going to weigh him ? " she asked timidly . 

 " Not till to-night , " said her father . 

 " Submit ! " called her mother . 

Submit went in and swept the kitchen floor . It was an hour after that , 
when her mother was in the south room , getting it ready for her
grandparents , who were coming home to Thanksgiving--they had been on a
visit to their youngest son--that Submit crept slyly into the pantry . 
The turkey lay there on the broad shelf before the window . Submit
looked at him . She thought he was small .  " He was  ' most all feathers , " 
she whispered , ruefully . She stood looking disconsolately at the
turkey . Suddenly her eyes flashed and a red flush came over her face . 
It was as if Satan , coming into that godly new England home three
days before Thanksgiving , had whispered in her ear . 

Presently Submit stole softly back into the kitchen , set a chair
before the chimney cupboard , climbed up , and got the pewter dish full
of Revolutionary bullets . Then she stole back to the pantry and
emptied the bullets into the turkey ' s crop . Then she got a needle and
thread from her mother ' s basket , sewed up the crop carefully , and set
the empty dish back in the cupboard . She had just stepped down out of
the chair when her brother Jonas came in . 

 " Submit , " said he ,  " let ' s have one game of odd or even with the
bullets . " 

 " I am too busy , " said Submit .  " I ' ve got to spin my stint . " 

 " Just one game . Mother won ' t care . " 

 " No; I can ' t . " 

Submit flew to her spinning wheel in the corner . Jonas , still
remonstrating , strolled into the pantry . 

 " I don ' t believe mother wants you in there , " Submit said anxiously . 

 " See here , Submit , " Jonas called out in an eager voice ,  " I ' ll get the
steelyards , and we ' ll weigh the turkey . We can do it as well as
anybody . " 

Submit left her spinning wheel . She was quite pale with trepidation
when Jonas and she adjusted the turkey in the steelyards . What if
those bullets should rattle out ? But they did not . 

 " He weighs twenty pounds and a quarter , " announced Jonas , with a
gasp , after peering anxiously at the figures .  " He ' s the biggest turkey
that was ever raised in these parts . " 

Jonas exulted a great deal , but Submit did not say much . As soon as
Jonas had laid the turkey back on the shelf and gone out , she watched
her chance and removed the bullets , replacing them in the pewter dish . 

When Mr . Thompson and Thomas came home at twilight there was a deal of
talk over the turkey . 

 " The Adams ' turkey doesn ' t weigh but nineteen pounds , " Jonas
announced .  " Sarah was out there when they weighed him , and she  ' most
cried . " 

 " I think Sarah and Submit and all of you are very foolish about it , " 
said Mrs . Thompson severely .  " What difference does it make if one
weighs a pound or two more than the other , if there is enough to go
round ? " 

 " Submit looks as if she was sorry ours weighed the most now , " said
Jonas . 

 " My thumb aches , " said Submit . 

 " Go and get the balm of Gilead bottle , and put some more on , " ordered
her mother . 

That night when she went to bed she could not say her prayers . When
she woke in the morning it was with a strange , terrified feeling , as
if she had climbed a wall into some unknown dreadful land . She
wondered if Sarah would bring Thankful over; she dreaded to see her
coming , but she did not come . Submit herself did not stir out of the
house all that day or the next , and Sarah did not bring Thankful until
next morning . 

They were all out in the kitchen about an hour before dinner . 
Grandfather Thompson sat in his old armchair at one corner of the
fireplace , Grandmother Thompson was knitting , and Jonas and Submit
were cracking butternuts . Submit was a little happier this morning . 
She thought Sarah would never bring Thankful , and so she had not done
so much harm by cheating in the weight of the turkey . 

There was a tug at the latch of the kitchen door; it was pushed open
slowly and painfully , and Sarah entered with Thankful in her arms . She
said not a word to anybody , but her little face was full of woe . She
went straight to Submit , and laid Thankful in her lap; then she turned
and fled with a great sob . The door slammed after her . All the
Thompsons stopped and looked at Submit . 

 " Submit , what does this mean ? " her father asked . 

Submit looked at him , trembling . 

 " Speak , " said he . 

 " Submit , mind your father , " said Mrs . Thompson . 

 " What did she bring you the doll baby for ? " asked Grandmother
Thompson . 

 " Sarah--was going to give me Thankful if--our turkey weighed most , and
I was going to--give her my work-box if hers weighed most , " said
Submit jerkily . Her lips felt stiff . 

Her father looked very sober and stern . He turned to his father . When
Grandfather Thompson was at home , every one deferred to him . Even at
eighty he was the recognized head of the house . He was a wonderful
old man , tall and soldierly , and full of a grave dignity . He looked at
Submit , and she shrank . 

 " Do you know , " said he ,  " that you have been conducting yourself like
unto the brawlers in the taverns and ale-houses ? " 

 " Yes , sir , " murmured Submit , although she did not know what he meant . 

 " No godly maid who heeds her elders will take part in any such foolish
and sinful wager , " her grandfather continued . 

Submit arose , hugging Thankful convulsively . She glanced wildly at her
great-grandmother ' s musket over the shelf . The same spirit that had
aimed it at the Indian possessed her , and she spoke out quite clearly : 
 " Our turkey didn ' t weigh the most , " said she .  " I put the Revolutionary
bullets in his crop . " 

There was silence . Submit ' s heart beat so hard that Thankful quivered . 

 " Go upstairs to your chamber , Submit , " said her mother ,  " and you need
not come down to dinner . Jonas , take that doll and carry it over to
the Adams ' house . " 

Submit crept miserably out of the room , and Jonas carried Thankful
across the yard to Sarah . 

Submit crouched beside her little square window set with tiny panes of
glass , and watched him . She did not cry . She was very miserable , but
confession had awakened a salutary smart in her soul , like the balm
of Gilead on her cut thumb . She was not so unhappy as she had been . 
She wondered if her father would whip her , and she made up her mind
not to cry if he did . 

After Jonas came back she still crouched at the window . Exactly
opposite in the Adams ' house was another little square window , and
that lighted Sarah ' s chamber . All of a sudden Sarah ' s face appeared
there . The two little girls stared pitifully at each other . Presently
Sarah raised her window , and put a stick under it; then Submit did the
same . They put their faces out , and looked at each other a minute
before speaking . Sarah ' s face was streaming with tears . 

 " What you crying for ? " called Submit softly . 

 " Father sent me up here  ' cause it is sinful to--make bets , and Aunt
Rose has come , and I can ' t have any--Thanksgiving dinner , " wailed
Sarah . 

 " I ' m wickeder than you , " said Submit .  " I put the Revolutionary bullets
in the turkey to make it weigh more than yours . Yours weighed the
most . If mother thinks it ' s right , I ' ll give you the work-box . " 

 " I don ' t--want it , " sobbed Sarah .  " I ' m dreadful sorry you ' ve got to
stay up there , and can ' t have any dinner , Submit . " 

Answering tears sprang to Submit ' s eyes .  " I ' m dreadful sorry you ' ve
got to stay up there , and can ' t have any dinner , " she sobbed back . 

There was a touch on her shoulder . She looked around and there stood
the grandmother . She was trying to look severe , but she was beaming
kindly on her . Her fat , fair old face was as gentle as the mercy that
tempers justice; her horn spectacles and her knitting needles and the
gold beads on her neck all shone in the sunlight . 

 " You had better come downstairs , child , " said she .  " Dinner ' s  ' most
ready , and mebbe you can help your mother . Your father isn ' t going to
whip you this time , because you told the truth about it , but you
mustn ' t ever do such a dreadful wicked thing again . " 

 " No , I won ' t , " sobbed Submit . She looked across , and there beside
Sarah ' s face in the window was another beautiful smiling one . It had
pink cheeks and sweet black eyes and black curls , among which stood a
high tortoise-shell comb . 

 " Oh , Submit ! " Sarah called out , joyfully ,  " Aunt Rose says I can go
down to dinner ! " 

 " Grandmother says I can ! " called back Submit . 

The beautiful smiling face opposite leaned close to Sarah ' s for a
minute . 

 " Oh , Submit ! " cried Sarah ,  " Aunt Rose says she will make you a doll
baby like Thankful , if your mother ' s willing ! " 

 " I guess she ' ll be willing if she ' s a good girl , " called Grandmother
Thompson . 

Submit looked across a second in speechless radiance . Then the faces
vanished from the two little windows , and Submit and Sarah went down
to their Thanksgiving dinners . 


