In the days when magic was still of some avail , a king ' s son was
enchanted by an old witch , and compelled to spend his life sitting
inside a great Iron Stove in a wood . There he passed many years , and
nobody could release him . 

Once a king ' s daughter came into the wood . She had gone astray , and
could not find her father ' s kingdom again ; and having wandered about
for nine days , at last she stood before the Iron Stove . Then a voice
came out of it , and said ,  " Whence do you come , and where do you want
to go ? " 

She answered ,  " I have wandered from my father ' s kingdom , and lost
myself , and cannot get home again . " 

Then the voice spoke out of the Iron Stove :  " I will help you home
again , and that , too , in a short time , if you will promise to do what
I desire . I am a greater prince than you are a princess , and I wish to
marry you . " 

She was very much frightened , and thought ,  " Oh , what shall I do ! How
can I marry an Iron Stove ? " 

However , as she wanted very much to go home to her father , she
promised what was demanded of her .  " Very well , " said the voice  " you
must come again , and bring a knife with you , and scrape a hole in the
iron . " 

And the Iron Stove gave her for a companion something , or
somebody--she was not quite sure what--who walked by her side and did
not speak , but took her safe home within two hours . Then there was
great joy in her father ' s palace , and the old king fell on her neck , 
and kissed her many times . But she was very sorrowful , and said :  " Dear
father , you little know what has happened to me ; I should never have
come home again out of the great wild wood , if I had not passed by an
Iron Stove . But I had to promise faithfully that I would return back
to it , and marry it . " 

The old king was so terrified that he nearly fell into a swoon ; for he
had only this one child . They therefore consulted together , and
decided to send , not the princess , but a miller ' s daughter , who was
very beautiful ; and leading her out , they gave her a knife , and told
her how she was to scrape the Iron Stove . When she reached the wood , 
she scraped away for four-and-twenty hours , but could not make the
slightest impression . But when day began to break , a voice in the Iron
Stove called out ,  " It seems to me that it is day out there . " 

She answered :  " It seems so to me too ; I think I hear my father ' s mill
turning . " 

 " Oh , then , you are a miller ' s daughter ; go straight back and send the
king ' s daughter here ! " 

Then she returned and told the old king that the Iron Stove would not
have her ; he wanted the princess only . The old king was greatly
frightened , and the princess wept . But they had still a swineherd ' s
daughter , who was still more beautiful than the miller ' s girl ; so they
gave her a piece of gold , in order that she might be persuaded to go , 
instead of the king ' s daughter , to the Iron Stove . She was taken to
the wood as before , and had also to scrape for four-and-twenty hours ; 
but she could make no impression . 

Now , when dawn broke , a voice called out of the Stove ,  " It seems to me
it is day out there . " 

Then she answered ,  " It seems so to me too ; I think I hear my father ' s
little horn sounding . " 

 " So you are the swineherd ' s daughter ; go away directly , and bid the
king ' s daughter come , and tell her it shall happen to her as I
forewarned her ; if she does not come , everything in the kingdom shall
fall to pieces and tumble down , and no stone remain upon another . " 

When the king ' s daughter heard this , she began to cry ; but there was
nothing else to be done--she must keep her promise . She took leave of
her father , put a knife in her pocket , and went out to the Iron Stove
in the wood . When she arrived there , she began to scrape and scrape ; 
the iron yielded , and in two hours she had already scraped a little
hole . She looked in and saw a most beautiful youth : oh ! he shone so
with gold and precious stones , that he pleased her to the very bottom
of her heart . She scraped away faster than ever , till she made the
hole so large that he was able to get out . 

Then he said ,  " You are mine , and I am yours , you have freed me , and
you are my bride . " 

He wished to take her home to his kingdom , but she begged that she
might go once more to see her father ; and the prince gave her leave , 
on condition that she should speak no more than three words with him , 
and come back again . So she went home ; but , alas ! being a little
chatter-box , she spoke more than three words . The Iron Stove
disappeared instantly , and was removed far away , over glass mountains
and sharp swords ; but the king ' s son , being now freed , was not shut up
in it . 

The princess took leave of her father , and took some money with her , 
but not much , and went again into the great wood . There she looked
everywhere for the Iron Stove , but it was not to be found . 

She sought it for nine days , until her hunger was so great that she
did not know what to do ; for she had eaten all the food she could
find , and had nothing left to keep her alive . At evening-tide she
climbed up into a little tree , and purposed spending the night there , 
for fear of the wild beasts . But when midnight came she saw afar off a
little glimmering light , and thinking ,  " Oh ! there I should be safe , " 
climbed down and went towards it . 

Then she came to a little old house , overgrown with grass , with a
little heap of wood before the door . Wondering how it came there , she
looked in through the window , and saw nothing inside but a number of
fat little frogs , and a table beautifully spread . There were on it
roast meats and wines , and the plates and cups were all of silver . So
she took heart , and knocked . Immediately the fattest frog called out--

  " Maiden sweet and small , 
 Hutzelbein I call ; 
 Hutzelbein ' s little dog . 
 Creep about and see
 Who this can be . " 

Then a little frog came and opened the door for her ; and as soon as
she came in , the frogs all bade her welcome , and persuaded her to sit
down . They asked-- " Whence do you come ? where do you want to go ? " 

Then she told them all that had happened to her , and how , because she
had disobeyed the command not to speak to her father more than three
words , the Stove had disappeared , as well as the king ' s son ; now she
was determined to seek him , and to wander over mountain and valley
till she found him . 

The old fat frog said--

  " Maiden sweet and small , 
 Hutzelbein I call ; 
 Hutzelbein ' s little dog , 
 Creep about and see ; 
 Bring the great box to me . " 

Then the little frog went and brought the box . Afterwards they gave
the princess food and drink , and took her to a beautifully-made bed , 
all of silk and velvet ; she laid herself in it , and slept peacefully . 

When day came she arose , and the old frog gave her three needles out
of the great box , and told her to take them with her . They would be
very necessary to her , for she would have to go over a high glass
mountain , and three sharp swords , and a great sea ; if she passed all
those , she would recover her dearest prince . The frog also gave her , 
besides the three needles , other gifts , which she was to take great
care of--namely , a plough-wheel , and three nuts . 

With these she set off , and when she came to the slippery glass
mountain , she stuck the three needles into it as she walked--some
before her feet , and some behind--and so managed to get across . When
she was on the other side , she hid the needles , in a place which she
had noticed particularly , and went on her way . Afterwards she came to
the sharp-cutting swords , but she set herself on her plough-wheel and
rolled safely over them . At last she came before a great lake , which
she had to sail across , and when she had done so she saw a great
castle . She went in and said she was a poor maiden , who wished very
much to hire herself out , if she might be taken in there as a servant . 
For the frogs had told her that the king ' s son , whom she had released
out of the Iron Stove in the great wood , dwelt there ; so she was
content to be taken as kitchen-maid , for very small pay . 

Now the king ' s son had thought the princess was dead ; and there was
now with him another maiden , whom he had been persuaded he ought to
marry , which grieved the poor kitchen-maid very much . 

In the evening , when she had washed up the dishes , and had done all
her work , she felt in her pocket , and found the three nuts which the
old frog had given her . She bit one open , and was going to eat the
kernel , when , behold , inside it was the most beautiful dress
imaginable--so beautiful that the bride soon heard of it , came and
asked to see it , and wanted to buy it , saying it was no dress for a
kitchen-maid . But the kitchen-maid thought differently , and refused to
sell it , but offered to give it as a present , if the bride would grant
her one favour--namely , to sleep one night on the mat outside the
bridegroom ' s door . The bride gave her leave , because the dress was so
beautiful , and she had none like it . 

Now when it was evening , she said to her bridegroom :  " The foolish
kitchen-maid wants to sleep on the mat outside your door . " 

 " If you are content , I am , " said he . 

But the bride gave him a glass of wine , in which she had put a
sleeping draught ; so that he slept so soundly , nothing could wake him . 
While , outside the door , the princess wept the whole night , saying :  " I
have released you out of the wild wood--out of an Iron Stove ; in
seeking you , I have gone over a glass mountain , over three sharp
swords , and over a great lake ; yet , now that I find you , you will not
hear me . " 

Next evening , when she had washed up everything , she bit the second
nut open ; and inside it was a far more beautiful dress than the first
which , when the bride saw , she wished to buy also . But the girl again
refused to take money and again begged that she might spend the night
outside the bridegroom ' s door . Once more , the bride gave him a
sleeping-draught , and he slept so soundly , that he could hear nothing . 
But the kitchen-maid wept the whole night long , crying :  " I have
released you out of a wild wood , and out of an Iron Stove ; and have
gone over a glass mountain , over three sharp swords , and over a great
lake , before I found you ; and yet , when I find you , you will not hear
me . " 

The third evening , she bit open the third nut ; and there was in it a
still more beautiful dress , which shone stiff with pure gold . When the
bride saw it , she wished more earnestly than ever to have it ; but the
kitchen-maid would only give it to her on condition that she might
sleep , for the third time , on the mat at the bridegroom ' s door . But
this time the prince was cautious , and left the sleeping-draught
untouched . Now , when she began to weep , and to call out ,  " Dearest
treasure , I have released you out of the horrible wild wood , and out
of an Iron Stove , " the king ' s son sprang up , crying out :  " This is my
right true love--she is mine , and I am hers . " Then he declared he
would not marry the other bride , whom he did not love ; and so , still
in the middle of the night , he got into a carriage with the
kitchen-maid , and drove away . 

When they came to the great lake , they sailed over ; and at the three
sharp swords , they seated themselves on the plough-wheel ; and at the
glass mountain , they found the three needles , and stuck them in step
by step . So they came at last to the little old house ; but , as they
went in , lo ! it changed to a great castle ; the frogs turned to
princes and princesses , all kings ' children , and received them both
with great joy . There the wedding was celebrated , and they remained in
the castle , which was much larger than that which belonged to the
princess ' s father . But as the old man lamented very much his
daughter ' s loss , and his own loneliness , they soon went and fetched
him home to themselves . So they had two kingdoms , instead of one , and
lived happily together all their days . 


