An old chieftain sat in his wigwam , quietly smoking his favourite pipe , 
when a crowd of Indian boys and girls suddenly entered , and , with
numerous offerings of tobacco , begged him to tell them a story , and he
did so . 

There was once a time when this world was filled with happy people; when
all the nations were as one , and the crimson tide of war had not begun
to roll . Plenty of game was in the forest and on the plains . None were
in want , for a full supply was at hand . Sickness was unknown . The beasts
of the field were tame; they came and went at the bidding of man . One
unending spring gave no place for winter--for its cold blasts or its
unhealthy chills . Every tree and bush yielded fruit . Flowers carpeted
the earth . The air was laden with their fragrance , and redolent with the
songs of wedded warblers that flew from branch to branch , fearing none , 
for there were none to harm them . There were birds then of more
beautiful song and plumage than now . It was at such a time , when earth
was a paradise and man worthily its possessor , that the Indians were
lone inhabitants of the American wilderness . They numbered millions;
and , living as nature designed them to live , enjoyed its many blessings . 
Instead of amusements in close rooms , the sport of the field was theirs . 
At night they met on the wide green beneath the heavenly worlds--the
_ah-nung-o-kah_ . They watched the stars; they loved to gaze at them , 
for they believed them to be the residences of the good , who had been
taken home by the Great Spirit . 

One night they saw one star that shone brighter than all others . Its
location was far away in the south , near a mountain peak . For many
nights it was seen , till at length it was doubted by many that the star
was as far distant in the southern skies as it seemed to be . This doubt
led to an examination , which proved the star to be only a short distance
away , and near the tops of some trees . A number of warriors were deputed
to go and see what it was . They went , and on their return said it
appeared strange , and somewhat like a bird . A committee of the wise men
were called to inquire into , and if possible to ascertain the meaning
of , the strange phenomenon . They feared that it might be the omen of
some disaster . Some thought it a precursor of good , others of evil; and
some supposed it to be the star spoken of by their forefathers as the
forerunner of a dreadful war . 

One moon had nearly gone by , and yet the mystery remained unsolved . One
night a young warrior had a dream , in which a beautiful maiden came and
stood at his side , and thus addressed him :  " Young brave ! charmed with
the land of my forefathers , its flowers , its birds , its rivers , its
beautiful lakes , and its mountains clothed with green , I have left my
sisters in yonder world to dwell among you . Young brave ! ask your wise
and your great men where I can live and see the happy race continually;
ask them what form I shall assume in order to be loved . " 

Thus discoursed the bright stranger . The young man awoke . On stepping
out of his lodge he saw the star yet blazing in its accustomed place . At
early dawn the chief ' s crier was sent round the camp to call every
warrior to the council lodge . When they had met , the young warrior
related his dream . They concluded that the star that had been seen in
the south had fallen in love with mankind , and that it was desirous to
dwell with them . 

The next night five tall , noble-looking , adventurous braves were sent to
welcome the stranger to earth . They went and presented to it a pipe of
peace , filled with sweet-scented herbs , and were rejoiced that it took
it from them . As they returned to the village , the star , with expanded
wings , followed , and hovered over their homes till the dawn of day . 
Again it came to the young man in a dream , and desired to know where it
should live and what form it should take . Places were named--on the top
of giant trees , or in flowers . At length it was told to choose a place
itself , and it did so . At first it dwelt in the white rose of the
mountains; but there it was so buried that it could not be seen . It went
to the prairie; but it feared the hoof of the buffalo . It next sought
the rocky cliff; but there it was so high that the children , whom it
loved most , could not see it . 

 " I know where I shall live , " said the bright fugitive-- " where I can see
the gliding canoe of the race I most admire . Children ! --yes , they shall
be my playmates , and I will kiss their slumber by the side of cool
lakes . The nation shall love me wherever I am . " 

These words having been said , she alighted on the waters , where she saw
herself reflected . The next morning thousands of white flowers were seen
on the surface of the lakes , and the Indians gave them this name , 
_wah-be-gwan-nee_  ( white flower ) . 

This star lived in the southern skies . Her brethren can be seen far off
in the cold north , hunting the Great Bear , whilst her sisters watch her
in the east and west . 

Children ! when you see the lily on the waters , take it in your hands and
hold it to the skies , that it may be happy on earth , as its two sisters , 
the morning and evening stars , are happy in heaven . 
﻿
