 " Day after to-morrow will be Thanksgiving , " said Walter , taking his
seat beside Grandpa Davis on the top step of the front gallery . 

 " And no turkey for dinner , neither , " retorted Grandma Davis , while her
bright steel needles clicked in and out of the sock she was knitting . 

The old man was smoking his evening pipe , and sat for a moment with
his eyes fixed meditatively upon the blue hills massed in the
distance . 

 " Have we got so pore as all that , Mother ? " he asked , after a while , 
glancing over his shoulder at his wife , who was rocking to and fro
just back of him . 

 " I ' m obleeged to own to the truth , " answered the old lady dejectedly . 
 " What with the wild varmints in the woods and one thing an ' another , 
I ' m about cleaned out of all the poultry I ever had . It ' s downright
disheartenin ' . " 

 " Well , then , " asserted Grandpa Davis , with an unmirthful chuckle ,  " it
don ' t appear to me as we ' ve got so powerful much to be thankful about
this year . " 

 " Why , Grandpa ! " cried Walter , in shocked surprise ,  " I never did hear
you talk like that before . " 

 " Never had so much call to do it , mebbe , " interposed the old man
cynically . 

The last rays of the setting sun touched the two silvered heads , and
rested there like a benediction , before disappearing below the
horizon . 

Silence had fallen upon the little group , and a bullfrog down in the
fishpond was croaking dismally . 

 " Why don ' t you go hunting , and try to kill you a turkey for
Thanksgiving ? " ventured Walter , slipping his arm insinuatingly through
his grandfather ' s .  " I saw a great big flock of wild ones down on the
branch last week , and I got right close up to them before they flew . " 

 " I reckon there ought to be a smart sight of game round and about them
cane brakes along that branch , " said the old man slowly , as though
thinking aloud .  " It used to be ahead of any strip of woods in all
these parts , when me and Dick was boys . But nobody ain ' t hunted there , 
to my knowledge , not sence me and him fell out . " 

 " I wish you and Grandpa Dun were friends , " sighed Walter .  " It does
seem too bad to have two grandpas living right side by side , and not
speaking . " 

 " I ain ' t got no ill-will in my heart for Dick , " replied Grandpa Davis , 
 " but he is too everlastin ' hard-headed to knock under , and I ' ll be
blamed if I go more ' n halfway toward makin ' up . " 

 " That ' s just exactly what Grandpa Dun says about you , " Walter assured
him very earnestly . 

 " Wouldn ' t wonder if he did , " said the old man pointedly .  " Dick is
always ben a mighty hand to talk , and he ' d drap dead in his tracks if
he couldn ' t get in the last word . " 

Be this as it might , the breach had begun when the Davis cattle broke
down the worn fence and demolished the Dun crop of corn , and it
widened when the Dun hogs found their way through an old water gap and
rooted up a field of the Davis sweet potatoes . Several times similar
depredations were repeated , and then shotguns were used on both sides
with telling effect . The climax was reached when John Dun eloped with
Rebecca , the only child of the Davises . 

The young couple were forbidden their respective homes , though the
farm they rented was scarce half a mile away , and the weeks rolled
into months without sign of their parents relenting . 

When Walter was born , however , the two grandmothers stole over , 
without their husbands ' knowledge , and mingled their tears in happy
communion over the tiny blue-eyed mite . 

It was a memorable day at each of the houses when the sturdy little
fellow made his way , unbidden and unattended , to pay his first call , 
and ever afterward  ( though they would not admit it , even to
themselves ) the grandfathers watched for his coming , and vied with
each other in trying to win the highest place in his young affections . 

He had inherited characteristics of each of his grandsires , and
possessed the bold , masterful manner which was common to them both . 
 " Say , Grandpa , " he urged ,  " go hunting to-morrow and try to kill a
turkey for Thanksgiving , won ' t you ? I know grandma would feel better
to have one , and if you make a cane caller , like papa does , I ' ll bet
you can get a shot at one sure . " 

The old man did not commit himself about going , but when Walter saw
him surreptitiously take down his gun from the pegs on the wall across
which it had lain for so many years , and began to rub the barrels and
oil the hammers , he went home satisfied that he had scored another
victory . 

Perhaps nothing less than his grandson ' s pleading could have induced
Grandpa Davis to visit again the old hunting-ground which had been so
dear to him in bygone days , which was so rich in hallowed memories . It
seemed almost a desecration of the happy past to hunt there now alone . 

The first cold streaks of dawn were just stealing into the sky the
next morning when , accoutred with shot-pouch , powder-flask , and his
old double-barrelled gun , Grandpa Davis made his way toward the
branch . A medley of bird notes filled the air , long streamers of gray
moss floated out from the swaying trees , and showers of autumn leaves
fluttered down to earth . Some of the cows were grazing outside the
pen , up to their hocks in lush , fresh grass , while others lay on the
ground contentedly chewing their cuds . All of them raised their heads
and looked at him as he passed them by . 

How like old times it was to be up at daybreak for a hunt ! The long
years seemed suddenly to have rolled away , leaving him once more a
boy . He almost wondered why Dick had not whistled to him as he used to
do . Dick was an early riser , and somehow always got ready before he
did . 

There was an alertness in the old man ' s face and a spring in his step
as he lived over in thought the joyous days of his childhood . The
clouds were flushed with pink when he came in sight of the big water
oak on the margin of the stream , and recollected how he and Dick had
loved to go swimming in the deep , clear water beneath its shade . 

 " We used to run every step of the way , " he soliloquized , laughing , 
 " unbuttonin ' as we went , chuck our clothes on the bank , and  ' most
break our necks tryin ' to git in the water fust . I ' ve got half a
notion to take a dip this mornin ' , if it wasn ' t quite so cool , " he
went on , but a timely twinge of rheumatism brought him to his senses , 
and he seated himself on the roots of a convenient tree . 

Cocking his gun , he laid it across his knees , and waited there
motionless , imitating the yelp of a turkey the while . Three or four
small canes , graduated in size , and fitted firmly one into the other , 
enabled him to make the note , and so expert had he become by long
practice that the deception was perfect . 

After a pause he repeated the call; then came another pause , another
call , and over in the distance there sounded an answer . How the blood
coursed through the old man ' s veins as he listened ! There it was
again . It was coming nearer , but very slowly . He wondered how many
were in the flock , and called once more . This time , to his surprise , 
an answer came from a different direction--a long , rasping sound , a
sort of cross between a cock ' s crow and a turkey ' s yelp . 

He started involuntarily , and very cautiously peeped around . Hardly
twenty steps from him another gray head protruded itself from the hole
of another tree , and Grandpa Davis and Grandpa Dun looked into each
other ' s eyes . 

 " I ' ll be double-jumped-up if that ain ' t Dick ! " cried Grandpa Davis , 
under his breath .  " And there ain ' t a turkey as ever wore a feather
that he could fool . A minute more , and he ' ll spile the fun . Dick , " he
commanded ,  " stop that racket , and sneak over here by me , " beckoning
mysteriously .  " Sh-h-h ! they are answerin ' ag ' in . Down on your
marrow-bones whilst I call . " 

Flattening himself upon the ground as nearly as he could , and creeping
behind the undergrowth , Grandpa Dun made his way laboriously to the
desired spot . He had never excelled in calling turkeys , but he was a
far better shot than Grandpa Davis . 

Without demur the two old boys fell naturally into the _rôle_ of
former days . Breathless and excited , they crouched there , waiting for
the fateful moment . Their nerves were tense , their eyes dilated , and
their hearts beating like trip-hammers . 

Grandpa Davis had continued to call , and now the answer was very near . 

 " Gimme the first shot , Billy , " whispered Grandpa Dun .  " I let you do
the callin ' ; and , besides , you know you never could hit nothin ' that
wasn ' t as big as the side of a meetin ' -house . " 

Before Grandpa Davis had time to reply , there came the  " put-put-put " 
which signals possible danger . A stately gobbler raised his head to
reconnoitre; two guns were fired almost simultaneously , and , with a
whir and a flutter , the flock disappeared in the cane brake . 

The two old boys bounded over the intervening sticks and stumps with
an agility that Walter himself might have envied , and bending over the
prostrate gobbler exclaimed in concert :  " Ain ' t he a dandy , though ! " 

They examined him critically , cutting out his beard as a trophy , and
measured the spread of his wings . 

 " But he ' s yourn , after all , Dick , " said Grandpa Davis ruefully .  " These
here ain ' t none of my shot , so I reckon I must have missed him . " 

 " I knowed you would , Billy , afore your fired , " Grandpa Dun replied , 
with mock gravity ,  " but that don ' t cut no figger . He ' s big enough for
us to go halvers and both have plenty . More ' n that , you done the
callin ' anyhow . " 

Then they laughed , and as they looked into one another ' s faces , each
seemed to realize for the first time that his quondam chum was an old
man . 

A moment before they had been two rollicking boys off on a lark
together--playing hooky , perhaps--and in the twinkling of an eye some
wicked fairy had waved her wand and metamorphosed them into Walter ' s
two grandfathers , who had not spoken to each other since years before
the lad was born . 

Yet the humour of the situation was irresistible after all , and , 
without knowing just how it happened , or which made the first advance , 
Dick and Billy found themselves still laughing until the tears coursed
down their furrowed cheeks , and shaking hands with as much vigour as
though each one had been working a pump handle . 

 " I ' ll tell you what it is , Billy , " said Dick at last;  " you all come
over to my house , and we ' ll eat him together on Thanksgivin ' . " 

 " See here , Dick , " suggested Billy , abstracting a nickel from his
trousers ' pocket;  " heads at your house , and tails at mine . " 

 " All right , " came the hearty response . 

Billy tossed the coin into the air : it struck a twig and hid itself
among the fallen leaves , where they sought it in vain . 

 " ' Tain ' t settled yet , " announced Dick;  " but lemme tell you what let ' s
do . S ' posin ' we all go over to-morrow--it ' ll be Thanksgivin ' , you
know--and eat him at John ' s house . " 

 " Good ! " cried Billy , with beaming face .  " You always did have a head
for thinkin ' up things , Dick , and this here ' ll sorter split the
difference , and ease matters so as-- " 

 " Yes , and our two old women can draw straws , if they ' ve got a mind to , 
and see which of them is obligated to make the fust call , " interrupted
Dick . 

 " Jist heft him , old feller , " urged one of them . 

 " Ain ' t he a whopper , though ! " exclaimed the other . 

 " Have a chaw , Dick ? " asked Billy , offering his plug of tobacco . 

 " Don ' t keer if I do , " acquiesced Dick , biting off a goodly mouthful . 

Seating themselves upon a fallen hickory log , they chewed and
expectorated , recalling old times , and enjoying their laugh with the
careless freedom of their childhood days . 

 " Dick , do your ricolleck the fight you and a coon had out on the limb
of that tree over yonder , one night ? " queried Billy , nudging his
companion in the ribs .  " He come mighty nigh gittin ' the best of you . " 

 " He tore one sleeve out of my jacket , and mammy gimme a beatin ' 
besides , " giggled Dick .  " And say , Billy , wasn ' t it fun the day we
killed old man Lee ' s puddle ducks for wild ones ? I don ' t believe I
ever run as fast in my life . " 

 " And , Dick , do you remember the night your pappy hung the saddle up on
the head of the bed to keep you from ridin ' the old gray mare to
singin ' school , and you rid her , bareback , anyway ? You ricolleck you
was stoopin ' over , blowin ' the fire , next mornin ' , when he seen the
hairs on your britches , an ' come down on you with the leather strop
afore you knowed it . " 

Thus one adventure recalled another , and the two old boys laughed
uproariously , clapping their hands and holding their sides , while the
sun climbed up among the treetops . 

 " Ain ' t we ben two old fools to stay mad all this time ? " asked one of
them , and the other readily agreed that they had , as they once more
grasped hands before parting . 

Walter had arranged the Thanksgiving surprise for his parents , but
when he brought home the big gobbler he was unable longer to keep the
secret , and divulged his share in what had happened . 

 " I didn ' t really believe either one of them could hit a turkey , " he
confided to his father ,  " but I wanted to have them meet once more , for
I knew if they did they would make friends . " 

The parlour was odorous with late fall roses next morning , the table
set , and Walter and his parents in gala attire , when two couples , 
walking arm in arm , appeared upon the stretch of white road leading up
to the front gate . 

One couple was slightly in advance of the other , and Grandpa Davis , 
who was behind , whispered to his wife : 

 " Listen , Mary , Dick is actually tryin ' to sing , and he never could
turn a tune , but somehow it does warm up my heart to hear him : seems
like old times ag ' in . " 

After dinner was over--and such a grand dinner it was--Grandpa Davis
voiced the sentiment of the rest of the happy family party when he
announced , quite without warning : 

 " Well , this here has ben the thankfulles ' Thanksgivin ' I ever seen , 
and I hope the good Lord will spar ' us all for yet a few more . " 




A THANKSGIVING DINNER THAT FLEW AWAY[26]

BY HEZEKIAH BUTTERWORTH . 

 A Cape Cod story about a wise old gander whose adventure on
 the sea insured him against the perils of the Thanksgiving
 hatchet . For boys or girls . 


There is one sound that I shall always remember . It is  " Honk ! " 

[ 26 : From  " Zigzag Journeys in Acadia and New France , " 
Lothrop , Lee & Shepard Company . ]

I spun around like a top , one summer day when I heard it , looking
nervously in every direction . 

I had just come down from the city to the Cape with my sister Hester
for my third summer vacation . I had left the cars with my arms full of
bundles , and hurried toward Aunt Targood ' s . 

The cottage stood in from the road . There was a long meadow in front
of it . In the meadow were two great oaks and some clusters of lilacs . 
An old , mossy stone wall protected the grounds from the road , and a
long walk ran from the old wooden gate to the door . 

It was a sunny day , and my heart was light . The orioles were flaming
in the old orchards; the bobolinks were tossing themselves about in
the long meadows of timothy , daisies , and patches of clover . There
was a scent of new-mown hay in the air . 

In the distance lay the bay , calm and resplendent , with white sails
and specks of boats . Beyond it rose Martha ' s Vineyard , green and cool
and bowery , and at its wharf lay a steamer . 

I was , as I said , light-hearted . I was thinking of rides over the
sandy roads at the close of the long , bright days; of excursions on
the bay; of clambakes and picnics . 

I was hungry , and before me rose visions of Aunt Targood ' s fish
dinners , roast chickens , and berry pies . I was thirsty , but ahead was
the old well sweep , and behind the cool lattice of the dairy window
were pans of milk in abundance . 

I tripped on toward the door with light feet , lugging my bundles , and
beaded with perspiration , but unmindful of all discomforts in the
thought of the bright days and good things in store for me . 

 " Honk ! honk ! " 

My heart gave a bound ! 

_Where_ did that sound come from ? 

Out of a cool cluster of innocent-looking lilac bushes I saw a dark
object cautiously moving . It seemed to have no head . I knew , however , 
that it had a head . I had seen it; it had seized me once in the
previous summer , and I had been in terror of it during all the rest of
the season . 

I looked down into the irregular grass , and saw the head and a very
long neck running along on the ground , propelled by the dark body , 
like a snake running away from a ball . It was coming toward me , and
faster and faster as it approached . 

I dropped my bundles . 

In a few flying leaps I returned to the road again , and armed myself
with a stick from a pile of cordwood . 

 " Honk ! honk ! honk ! " 

It was a call of triumph . The head was high in the air now . My enemy
moved grandly forward , as became the monarch of the great meadow
farmyard . 

I stood with beating heart , after my retreat . 

It was Aunt Targood ' s gander . 

How he enjoyed his triumph , and how small and cowardly he made me
feel ! 

 " Honk ! honk ! honk ! " 

The geese came out of the lilac bushes , bowing their heads to him in
admiration . Then came the goslings--a long procession of awkward , 
half-feathered things; they appeared equally delighted . 

The gander seemed to be telling his admiring audience all about it : 
how a strange lad with many bundles had attempted to cross the yard;
how he had driven him back , and had captured his bundles , and now was
monarch of the field . He clapped his wings when he had finished his
heroic story , and sent forth such a  " Honk ! " as might have startled a
major-general . 

Then he , with an air of great dignity and coolness , began to examine
my baggage . 

Among my effects were several pounds of chocolate caramels done up in
brown paper . Aunt Targood liked caramels , and I brought her a large
supply . 

He tore off the wrappers quickly . He bit one . It was good . He began to
distribute the bonbons among the geese , and they , with much liberality
and good-will , among the goslings . 

This was too much . I ventured through the gate , swinging my cordwood
stick . 

 " Shoo ! " 

He dropped his head on the ground , and drove it down the walk in a
lively waddle toward me . 

 " Shoo ! " 

It was Aunt Targood ' s voice at the door . 

He stopped immediately . 

His head was in the air again . 

 " Shoo ! " 

Out came Aunt Targood with her broom . 

She always corrected the gander with her broom . If I were to be
whipped I should choose a broom--not the stick . 

As soon as he beheld the broom he retired , although with much offended
pride and dignity , to the lilac bushes; and the geese and goslings
followed him . 

 " Hester , you dear child , " she said to my sister ,  " come here . I was
expecting you , and had been looking out for you , but missed sight of
you . I had forgotten all about the gander . " 

We gathered up the bundles and the caramels . I was light-hearted
again . 

How cool was the sitting-room , with the woodbine falling about the
open window ! 

Aunt brought me a pitcher of milk , and some strawberries , some bread
and honey , and a fan . 

While I was resting and taking my lunch , I could hear the gander
discussing the affairs of the farmyard with the geese . I did not
greatly enjoy the discussion . His tone of voice was very proud , and he
did not seem to be speaking well of me . 

I was suspicious that he did not think me a very brave lad . A young
person likes to be spoken well of , even by the gander . 

Aunt Targood ' s gander had been the terror of many well-meaning people , 
and of some evildoers , for many years . I have seen tramps and pack
peddlers enter the gate , and start on toward the door , when there
would sound that ringing warning like a war blast ,  " Honk , honk ! " and
in a few minutes these unwelcome people would be gone . Farmhouse
boarders from the city would sometimes enter the yard , thinking to
draw water by the old well sweep; in a few minutes it was customary to
hear shrieks , and to see women and children flying over the walls , 
followed by air-rending  " Honks ! " and jubilant cackles from the
victorious gander and his admiring family . 

Aunt Targood sometimes took summer boarders . Among those that I
remember was the Rev . Mr . Bonney , a fervent-souled Methodist preacher . 
He put the gander to flight with the cart whip , on the second day
after his arrival , and seemingly to aunt ' s great grief; but he never
was troubled by the feathered tyrant again . 

Young couples sometimes came to Father Bonney to be married; and one
summer afternoon there rode up to the gate a very young couple , whom
we afterward learned had  " run away , " or rather , had attempted to get
married without their parents ' approval . The young bridegroom hitched
the horse , and helped from the carriage the gayly dressed miss he
expected to make his wife . They started up the walk upon the run , as
though they expected to be followed and haste was necessary to prevent
the failure of their plans . 

 " Honk ! " 

They stopped . It was a voice of authority . 

 " Just look at him ! " said the bride .  " Oh , oh ! " 

The bridegroom cried  " Shoo ! " but he might as well have said  " Shoo " to
a steam engine . On came the gander , with his head and neck upon the
ground . He seized the lad by the calf of his leg , and made an
immediate application of his wings . The latter seemed to think he had
been attacked by dragons . As soon as he could shake him off he ran . So
did the bride , but in another direction; and while the two were thus
perplexed and discomfited , the bride ' s father appeared in a carriage , 
and gave her a most forcible invitation to ride home with him . She
accepted it without discussion . What became of the bridegroom , or how
the matter ended , we never knew . 

 " Aunt , what makes you keep that gander year after year ? " said I one
evening , as we were sitting on the lawn before the door .  " Is it
because he is a kind of watchdog , and keeps troublesome people away ? " 

 " No , child , no; I do not wish to keep most people away--not
well-behaved people--nor to distress nor annoy any one . The fact is , 
there is a story about that gander that I do not like to speak of to
every one--something that makes me feel tender toward him; so that if
he needs a whipping I would rather do it . He knows something that no
one else knows . I could not have him killed or sent away . You have
heard me speak of Nathaniel , my oldest boy ? " 

 " Yes . " 

 " That is his picture in my room , you know . He was a good boy to me . He
loved his mother . I loved Nathaniel--you cannot think how much I loved
Nathaniel . It was on my account that he went away . 

 " The farm did not produce enough for us all--Nathaniel , John , and me . 
We worked hard , and had a hard time . One year--that was ten years
ago--we were sued for our taxes . 

 " ' Nathaniel , ' said I ,  ' I will go to taking boarders . ' 

 " Then he looked up to me and said--oh , how noble and handsome he
appeared to me : 

 " ' Mother , I will go to sea . ' 

 " ' Where ? ' asked I , in surprise . 

 " ' In a coaster . ' 

 " I turned white . How I felt ! 

 " ' You and John can manage the place , ' he continued .  ' One of the
vessels sails next week--Uncle Aaron ' s; he offers to take me . ' 

 " It seemed best , and he made preparations to go . 

 " The spring before Skipper Ben--you have met Skipper Ben--had given me
some goose eggs; he had brought them from Canada , and said that they
were wild goose eggs . 

 " I set them under hens . In four weeks I had three goslings . I took
them into the house at first , but afterward made a pen for them out in
the yard . I brought them up myself , and one of those goslings is that
gander . 

 " Skipper Ben came over to see me the day before Nathaniel was to sail . 
Aaron came with him . 

 " I said to Aaron : 

 " ' What can I give Nathaniel to carry to sea with him to make him think
of home ? Cake , preserves , apples ? I haven ' t got much; I have done all
I can for him , poor boy . ' 

 " Brother looked at me curiously , and said : 

 " ' Give him one of those wild geese , and we will fatten it on shipboard
and will have it for our Thanksgiving dinner . ' 

 " What Brother Aaron said pleased me . The young gander was a noble
bird , the handsomest of the lot; and I resolved to keep the geese to
kill for my own use , and to give _him_ to Nathaniel . 

 " The next morning--it was late in September--I took leave of
Nathaniel . I tried to be calm and cheerful and hopeful . I watched him
as he went down the walk with the gander struggling under his arms . A
stranger would have laughed , but I did not feel like laughing; it was
true that the boys who went coasting were usually gone but a few
months , and came home hardy and happy . But when poverty compels a
mother and son to part , after they have been true to each other , and
shared their feelings in common , it seems hard , it seems hard--though
I do not like to murmur or complain at anything allotted to me . 

 " I saw him go over the hill . On the top he stopped and held up the
gander . He disappeared; yes , my own Nathaniel disappeared . I think of
him now as one who disappeared . 

 " November came . It was a terrible month on the coast that year . Storm
followed storm; the sea-faring people talked constantly of wrecks and
losses . I could not sleep on the nights of those high winds . I used to
lie awake thinking over all the happy hours that I had lived with
Nathaniel . 

 " Thanksgiving week came . 

 " It was full of an Indian-summer brightness after the long storms . The
nights were frosty , bright , and calm . 

 " I could sleep on those calm nights . 

 " One morning I thought I heard a strange sound in the woodland
pasture . It was like a wild goose . I listened; it was repeated . I was
lying in bed . I started up--I thought I had been dreaming . 

 " On the night before Thanksgiving I went to bed early , being very
tired . The moon was full; the air was calm and still . I was thinking
of Nathaniel , and I wondered if he would indeed have the gander for
his Thanksgiving dinner , if it would be cooked as well as I would have
cooked it , and if he would think of me that day . 

 " I was just going to sleep when suddenly I heard a sound that made me
start up and hold my breath . 

 " ' _Honk_ ! ' 

 " I thought it was a dream followed by a nervous shock . 

 " ' _Honk ! honk ! _ ' 

 " There it was again , in the yard , I was surely awake and in my senses . 

 " I heard the geese cackle . 

 " ' _Honk ! honk ! honk ! _ ' 

 " I got out of bed and lifted the curtain . It was almost as light as
day . 

 " Instead of two geese there were three . Had one of the neighbours ' 
geese stolen away ? 

 " I should have thought so , and should not have felt disturbed , but for
the reason that none of the neighbours ' geese had that peculiar
call--that hornlike tone that I had noticed in mine . 

 " I went out of the door . 

 " The _third_ goose looked like the very gander I had given Nathaniel . 
Could it be ? 

 " I did not sleep . I rose early and went to the crib for some corn . 

 " It _was_ a gander--a  ' wild gander ' --that had come in the night . He
seemed to know me . 

 " I trembled all over as though I had seen a ghost . I was so faint that
I sat down on the meal chest . 

 " As I was in that place , a bill pecked against the door . The door
opened . The strange gander came hobbling over the crib stone and went
to the corn bin . He stopped there , looked at me , and gave a sort of
glad  ' Honk ' as though he knew me and was glad to see me . 

 " I was certain that he was the gander I had raised and that Nathaniel
had lifted into the air when he gave me his last recognition from the
top of the hill . 

 " It overcame me . It was Thanksgiving . The church bell would soon be
ringing as on Sunday . And here was Nathaniel ' s Thanksgiving dinner and
Brother Aaron ' s--had it flown away ? Where was the vessel ? 

 " Years have passed--ten . You know I waited and waited for my boy to
come back . December grew dark with its rainy seas; the snows fell; May
lighted up the hills , but the vessel never came back . Nathaniel--my
Nathaniel--never returned . 

 " That gander knows something he could tell me if he could talk . Birds
have memories . _He_ remembered the corncrib--he remembered something
else . I wish he _could_ talk , poor bird ! I wish he could talk . I will
never sell him , nor kill him , nor have him abused . He _knows_ ! " 




MON-DAW-MIN , OR THE ORIGIN OF INDIAN CORN[27]

BY H . R . SCHOOLCRAFT . 

 This is the real Indian fairy tale of the birth of
 Mon-daw-min . Readers of Longfellow will remember his
 treatment of the same subject in  " Hiawatha . " 


In Times past , a poor Indian was living with his wife and children in
a beautiful part of the country . He was not only poor , but inexpert in
procuring food for his family , and his children were all too young to
give him assistance . Although poor , he was a man of a kind and
contented disposition . He was always thankful to the Great Spirit for
everything he received . The same disposition was inherited by his
eldest son , who had now arrived at the proper age to undertake the
ceremony of the Ke-ig-uish-im-o-win , or fast , to see what kind of a
spirit would be his guide and guardian through life . Wunzh , for this
was his name , had been an obedient boy from his infancy , and was of a
pensive , thoughtful , and mild disposition , so that he was beloved by
the whole family . As soon as the first indications of spring appeared , 
they built him the customary little lodge at a retired spot , some
distance from their own , where he would not be disturbed during this
solemn rite . In the meantime he prepared himself , and immediately went
into it , and commenced his fast . The first few days he amused himself , 
in the mornings , by walking in the woods and over the mountains , 
examining the early plants and flowers , and in this way prepared
himself to enjoy his sleep , and at the same time stored his mind with
pleasant ideas for his dreams . While he rambled through the woods , he
felt a strong desire to know how the plants , herbs , and berries grew
without any aid from man , and why it was that some species were good
to eat and others possessed medicinal or poisonous juices . He recalled
these thoughts to mind after he became too languid to walk about , and
had confined himself strictly to the lodge; he wished he could dream
of something that would prove a benefit to his father and family , and
to all others .  " True ! " he thought ,  " the Great Spirit made all things , 
and it is to him that we owe our lives . But could he not make it
easier for us to get our food than by hunting animals and taking fish ? 
I must try to find out this in my visions . " 

[ 27 : From  " The Myth of Hiawatha . " ]

On the third day he became weak and faint , and kept his bed . He
fancied , while thus lying , that he saw a handsome young man coming
down from the sky and advancing toward him . He was richly and gayly
dressed , having on a great many garments of green and yellow colours , 
but differing in their deeper or lighter shades . He had a plume of
waving feathers on his head , and all his motions were graceful . 

 " I am sent to you , my friend , " said the celestial visitor ,  " by that
Great Spirit who made all things in the sky and on the earth . He has
seen and knows your motives in fasting . He sees that it is from a kind
and benevolent wish to do good to your people , and to procure a
benefit for them , and that you do not seek for strength in war or the
praise of warriors . I am sent to instruct you , and show you how you
can do your kindred good . " He then told the young man to arise , and
prepare to wrestle with him , as it was only by this means that he
could hope to succeed in his wishes . Wunzh knew he was weak from
fasting , but he felt his courage rising in his heart , and immediately
got up , determined to die rather than fail . He commenced the trial , 
and after a protracted effort was almost exhausted when the beautiful
stranger said ,  " My friend , it is enough for once; I will come again to
try you " ; and , smiling on him , he ascended in the air in the same
direction from which he came . The next day the celestial visitor
reappeared at the same hour and renewed the trial . Wunzh felt that his
strength was even less than the day before , but the courage of his
mind seemed to increase in proportion as his body became weaker . 
Seeing this , the stranger again spoke to him in the same words he used
before , adding ,  " To-morrow will be your last trial . Be strong , my
friend , for this is the only way you can overcome me , and obtain the
boon you seek . " On the third day he again appeared at the same time
and renewed the struggle . The poor youth was very faint in body , but
grew stronger in mind at every contest , and was determined to prevail
or perish in the attempt . He exerted his utmost powers , and after the
contest had been continued the usual time , the stranger ceased his
efforts and declared himself conquered . For the first time he entered
the lodge , and sitting down beside the youth , he began to deliver his
instructions to him , telling him in what manner he should proceed to
take advantage of his victory . 

 " You have won your desires of the Great Spirit , " said the stranger . 
 " You have wrestled manfully . To-morrow will be the seventh day of your
fasting , your father will give you food to strengthen you , and as it
is the last day of trial , you will prevail . I know this , and now tell
you what you must do to benefit your family and your tribe . 
To-morrow , " he repeated ,  " I shall meet you and wrestle with you for
the last time; and , as soon as you have prevailed against me , you will
strip off my garments and throw me down , clean the earth of roots and
weeds , make it soft , and bury me in the spot . When you have done this , 
leave my body in the earth , and do not disturb it , but come
occasionally to visit the place , to see whether I have come to life , 
and be careful never to let the grass or weeds grow on my grave . Once
a month cover me with fresh earth . If you follow my instructions , you
will accomplish your object of doing good to your fellow-creatures by
teaching them the knowledge I now teach you . " He then shook him by the
hand and disappeared . 

In the morning the youth ' s father came with some slight refreshments , 
saying ,  " My son , you have fasted long enough . If the Great Spirit will
favour you , he will do it now . It is seven days since you have tasted
food , and you must not sacrifice your life . The Master of Life does
not require that . "  " My father , " replied the youth ,  " wait till the sun
goes down . I have a particular reason for extending my fast to that
hour . "  " Very well , " said the old man .  " I shall wait till the hour
arrives , and you feel inclined to eat . " 

At the usual hour of the day the sky visitor returned , and the trial
of strength was renewed . Although the youth had not availed himself of
his father ' s offer of food , he felt that new strength had been given
to him , and that exertion had renewed his strength and fortified his
courage . He grasped his angelic antagonist with supernatural strength , 
threw him down , took from him his beautiful garments and plume , and
finding him dead , immediately buried him on the spot , taking all the
precautions he had been told of , and being very confident , at the same
time , that his friend would again come to life . He then returned to
his father ' s lodge , and partook sparingly of the meal that had been
prepared for him . But he never for a moment forgot the grave of his
friend . He carefully visited it throughout the spring , and weeded out
the grass , and kept the ground in a soft and pliant state . Very soon
he saw the tops of the green plumes coming through the ground; and the
more careful he was to obey his instructions in keeping the ground in
order , the faster they grew . He was , however , careful to conceal the
exploit from his father . Days and weeks had passed in this way . The
summer was now drawing toward a close , when one day , after a long
absence in hunting , Wunzh invited his father to follow him to the
quiet and lonesome spot of his former fast . The lodge had been
removed , and the weeds kept from growing on the circle where it stood , 
but in its place stood a tall and graceful plant , with bright coloured
silken hair , surmounted with nodding plumes and stately leaves , and
golden clusters on each side .  " It is my friend , " shouted the lad;  " it
is the friend of all mankind . It is _Mondawmin_ . We need no longer
rely on hunting alone; for , as long as this gift is cherished and
taken care of , the ground itself will give us a living . " He then
pulled an ear .  " See , my father , " said he ,  " this is what I fasted for . 
The Great Spirit has listened to my voice , and sent us something new , 
and henceforth our people will not alone depend upon the chase or upon
the waters . " 

He then communicated to his father the instructions given him by the
stranger . He told him that the broad husks must be torn away , as he
had pulled off the garments in his wrestling; and having done this , 
directed him how the ear must be held before the fire till the outer
skin became brown , while all the milk was retained in the grain . The
whole family then united in feast on the newly grown ears , expressing
gratitude to the Merciful Spirit who gave it . So corn came into the
world . 




A MYSTERY IN THE KITCHEN[28]

BY OLIVE THORNE MILLER . 

 The boy who has a sister and the girl who has a brother are
 the ones who will best like this story of the spirited
 twins , Jessie and Jack . Jessie wanted to take music lessons
 and Jack tried mining in Colorado . 


Something very mysterious was going on in the Jarvis kitchen . The
table was covered with all sorts of good things--eggs and butter and
raisins and citron and spices; and Jessie , with her sleeves rolled up
and a white apron on , was bustling about , measuring and weighing and
chopping and beating and mixing those various ingredients in a most
bewildering way . 

[ 28 : From  " Kristy ' s Surprise Party , " Houghton , Mifflin Co . ]

Moreover , though she was evidently working for dear life , her face was
full of smiles; in fact , she seemed to have trouble to keep from
laughing outright , while Betty , the cook , who was washing potatoes at
the sink , fairly giggled with glee every few minutes , as if the sight
of Miss Jessie working in the kitchen was the drollest thing in the
world . 

It was one of the pleasantest sights that big , sunny kitchen had seen
for many a day , and the only thing that appeared mysterious about it
was that the two workers acted strangely like conspirators . If they
laughed--as they did on the slightest provocation--it was very soft
and at once smothered . Jessie went often to the door leading into the
hall , and listened; and if there came a knock on the floor , she
snatched off her apron , hastily wiped her hands , rolled down her
sleeves , asked Betty if there was any flour on her , and then hurried
away into another part of the house , trying to look cool and quiet , as
if she had not been doing anything . 

On returning from one of these excursions , as she rolled up her
sleeves again , she said : 

 " Betty , we must open the other window if it is cold . Mamma thought she
smelled roast turkey ! " 

Betty burst into a laugh which she smothered in her apron . Jessie
covered her mouth and laughed , too , but the window was opened to make
a draught and carry out the delicious odours , which , it must be
confessed , did fill that kitchen so full that no wonder they crept
through the cracks , and the keyholes , and hung about Jessie ' s dress as
she went through the hall , in a way to make one ' s mouth water . 

 " What did ye tell her ? " asked Betty , as soon as she could speak . 

 " Oh , I told her I thought potpie smelled a good deal like turkey , " 
said Jessie , and again both laughed .  " Wasn ' t it lucky we had potpie
to-day ? I don ' t know what I should have said if we hadn ' t . " 

Well , it was not long after that when Jessie lined a baking-dish with
nice-looking crust , filled it with tempting looking chicken legs and
wings and breasts and backs and a bowlful of broth , laid a white
blanket of crust over all , tucked it in snugly around the edge , cut
some holes in the top , and shoved it into the oven just after Betty
drew out a dripping pan in which reposed , in all the glory of rich
brown skin , a beautiful turkey . Mrs . Jarvis couldn ' t have had any nose
at all if she didn ' t smell that . It filled the kitchen full of nice
smells , and Betty hurried it into the pantry , where the window was
open to cool . 

Then Jessie returned to the spices and fruits she had been working
over so long , and a few minutes later she poured a rich , dark mass
into a tin pudding-dish , tied the cover on tight , and slipped it into
a large kettle of boiling water on the stove . 

 " There ! " she said ,  " I hope that ' ll be good . " 

 " I know it will , " said Betty confidently .  " That ' s y ' r ma ' s best
receipt . " 

 " Yes , but I never made it before , " said Jessie doubtfully . 

 " Oh , I know it ' ll be all right ,  ' n ' I ' ll watch it close , " said Betty;
 " ' n ' now you go ' n sit with y ' r ma . I want that table to git dinner . " 

 " But I ' m going to wash all these things , " said Jessie . 

 " You go long ! I ' d ruther do that myself .  ' Twon ' t take me no time , " 
said Betty . 

Jessie hesitated .  " But you have enough to do , Betty . " 

 " I tell you I want to do it , " the girl insisted . 

 " Oh , I know ! " said Jessie;  " you like to help about it . Well , you may;
and I ' m much obliged to you , besides . " And after a last look at the
fine turkey cooling his heels  ( if he had any ) in the pantry , Jessie
went into the other part of the house . 

When dinner time arrived and papa came from town , there duly appeared
on the table the potpie before mentioned , and various other things
pleasant to eat , but nothing was seen of the turkey so carefully
roasted nor of the chicken pie , nor of the pudding that caused the
young cook so much anxiety . Nothing was said about them , either , and
it was not Thanksgiving nor Christmas , though it was only a few days
before the former . 

It was certainly odd , and stranger things happened that night . In the
first place , Jessie sat up in her room and wrote a letter; and then , 
after her mother was in bed and everything still , she stole down the
back stairs with a candle , quietly , as though she was doing some
mischief . Betty , who came down to help her , brought a box in from the
woodshed; and the two plotters , very silently , with many listenings at
the door to see if any one was stirring , packed that box full of good
things . 

In it the turkey , wrapped in a snowy napkin , found a bed , the chicken
pie and the plum pudding--beautiful looking as Betty said it would
be--bore him company; and numerous small things , jam jars , fruits , 
etc . , etc . , filled the box to its very top . Then the cover , provided
with screws so that no hammering need be done , was fastened on . 

 " Now you go to bed , Miss Jessie , " whispered Betty .  " I ' ll wait . " 

 " No , you must be tired , " said Jessie .  " I ' d just as lief . " 

 " But I ' d ruther , " said Betty shortly-- " ' n ' I ' m going to; it won ' t be
long now . " 

So Jessie crept quietly upstairs , and before long there was a low rap
on the kitchen door . Betty opened it , and there stood a man . 

 " Ready ? " said he . 

 " Yes , " answered Betty;  " but don ' t speak loud; Miss Jarvis has sharp
ears ,  ' n ' we don ' t want her disturbed . Here ' s the card to mark it by , " 
and she produced a card from the table . 

The man put it in his pocket , shouldered the box , and Betty shut the
door . 

Not one of those good things ever went into the Jarvis dining-room ! 

The next morning things went on just as usual in the house . The
kitchen door was left open and Mrs . Jarvis was welcome to smell any of
the appetizing odours that wafted out into her room . Jessie resumed
her study , and especially her practice , for she hoped some day to be a
great musician . She waited on her mother and took charge of the
housekeeping , so much as was necessary with the well-tried servant at
the head of the kitchen . And though she had but sixteen years over her
bright brown head , she proved herself to be what in that little New
England town was called  " capable . " 

But that box of goodies ! Let us see where it went . 

It was Thanksgiving morning in a rough-looking little mining
settlement in Colorado . In a shanty rougher and more comfortless than
the rest were two persons : one , a man of thirty , was deeply engaged in
cleaning and oiling a gun which lay in pieces about him on the rough
bench where he sat; the other , a youth of sixteen , was trying to make
a fire burn in the primitive-looking affair that did duty as a stove . 
Both wore coarse miner ' s suits , and picks and other things about the
room told that their business was to dig for the yellow dust we are
all so greedy to have . 

Evidently luck had not been good , for the whole place appeared run
down , and the two looked absolutely hungry . 

It was Thanksgiving morning , as I said , but no thankfulness shone in
the two pale , thin faces . Both were sad , and the younger one almost
hopeless . 

 " Jack , " said the elder , pausing in his operations ,  " mind you give that
old hen a good boil , or we won ' t be able to eat it . " 

 " It ' ll be better ' n nothing , anyway , I suppose , " said Jack gloomily . 

 " Not much .  ' Specially if you don ' t get the taste of sage brush out of
it . Lucky I happened to get that shot at her , anyway , " he went on , 
 " I ' ve seen worse dinners--even Thanksgiving dinners--than a sage hen . " 

 " I haven ' t , " said Jack shortly; for the mention of Thanksgiving had
brought up before him with startling vividness the picture of a bright
dining-room in a certain town far away , a table loaded with good
things , and surrounded by smiling faces , and the contrast was almost
more than he could bear . 

 " Well , don ' t be down on your luck , boy , so long as you can get a good
fat hen to eat , if she does happen to be too fond of seasoning before
she ' s dead ! " replied the other cheerfully;  " we haven ' t struck it yet , 
but it ' s always darkest just before dawn , you know . We may be
millionaires before this time to-morrow . " 

 " We may , " answered Jack; but he didn ' t look as if he had much hope of
it . 

A few hours later the occupants of the cabin sat down to their
Thanksgiving dinner . It consisted of the hen aforesaid , cut in pieces
and boiled--looking very queer , too--served in the kettle in which the
operation had been performed . The table was at one end of the bench , 
the table service two jackknives and two iron spoons--absolutely
nothing else . 

The elder sat on the bench , the younger drew up a keg that had held
powder , and the dinner was about to begin . 

But that hen was destined never to be eaten , for just at that moment
the door was pushed open in the rude way of the country , a box set
down on the floor , and a rough voice announced : 

 " A box for Mr . Jack Jones . " 

Jack started up . 

 " For me , there must be a mistake ! Nobody knows-- " He stopped , for he
had not mentioned that his name was assumed . 

 " Likely not ! " said the man , with a knowing look ,  " but folks has a
mighty queer way of findin ' out , " and he shut the door and left . 

Jack stood staring at the box as if he had lost his wits . It could not
be from home , for no one knew where he went when he stole out of the
house one night six months ago , and ran away to seek his fortune . Not
a line had he ever written--not even when very ill , as he had been;
not even when without a roof to cover his head , as he had been more
than once; not even when he had not eaten for two days , as also , alas , 
had been his experience . 

He had deliberately run away , because--how trivial it looked to him
now , and how childish seemed his conduct--because he thought his
father too hard on him; would not allow him enough liberty; wanted to
dictate to this man of sixteen; he intended to show him that he could
get on alone . 

Poor Jack , the only comfort he had been able to extract from his hard
lot these many months of wandering , of work , of suffering such as he
had never dreamed of--his only comfort was that his tender mother
didn ' t know , his only sister would no more be worried by his grumbling
and complaints , and his father would be convinced now that he wasn ' t a
baby . Small comfort , too , to balance the hardships that had fallen to
his lot since the money he had drawn from the savings bank--his little
all--was used up . 

 " Why don ' t you open it ? " The gruff but not unkind voice of his
roommate , whom he called Tom , aroused him .  " Maybe there ' s something in
it better ' n sage hen , " trying to raise a smile . 

But no smile followed . Mechanically Jack sought the tools to open it , 
and in a few moments the cover was off . 

It _was_ from home ! On the very top was a letter addressed to Jack
Jarvis in a hand that he well knew . 

He hastily stuffed it into his pocket unopened . The layers of paper
were removed , and as each one was thrown off , something new appeared . 
Not a word was spoken , but the kettle of sage hen was silently put on
the floor by Tom as the bench began to fill up . A jar of cranberry
sauce , another of orange marmalade , oranges and apples , a plum
pudding , a chicken pie , and lastly , in its white linen wrapper , the
turkey we saw browning in that far-off New England kitchen . 

As one by one these things were lifted out and placed on the bench a
deep silence reigned in the cabin . Jack had choked at sight of the
letter , and memories of days far different from these checked even
Tom ' s usually lively tongue . A strange unpacking it was; how different
from the joyful packing at dead of night with those two laughing girl
faces bending over it ! 

When all was done , and the silence grew painful , Jack blurted out : 
 " Help yourself , " and bustled about , busily gathering up the papers and
folding them , and stuffing them back in the box , as though he were the
most particular housekeeper in the world . But if Jack couldn ' t eat , 
something , too , ailed Tom . He said simply : 

 " Don ' t feel hungry . Believe I ' ll go out and see what I can find , " and
shouldering his gun , now cleaned and put together , he quickly went out
and shut the door . 

Jack sat down on the keg and looked at the things which so vividly
brought home , and his happy life there , before him . He did not feel
hungry , either . He sat and stared for some time . Then he remembered
his letter . He drew it from his pocket and opened it . It was very
thick; and when he pulled it out of the envelope the first thing he
saw was the smiling face of his sister Jessie , his twin sister , his
playmate and comrade , his confidante from the cradle . The loss of her
ever-willing sympathy had been almost more to him than all the rest of
his troubles . 

This was another shock that brought something to his eyes that made
him see the others through a mist . There were the pictures of his
mother , whose gentle voice he could almost hear , and of his father , 
whose gray hairs and sad face he suddenly remembered were partly his
work . 

At last he read the letter . It began : 

 DEAR JACK : --I ' ve just found out where you are , and I ' m so
 glad . I send you this Thanksgiving dinner . It was too bad
 for you to go off so . You don ' t know how dreadful it was for
 mamma; she was sick a long time , and we were scared to death
 about her , but she ' s better now; she can sit up most all
 day . 

 Oh , Jack ! Father _cried_ ! I ' m sure he did , and he almost ran
 out of the room , and didn ' t say anything to anybody all day . 
 But I was determined I ' d find you . I shan ' t tell you how I
 did it , but Uncle John helped me , and now , Jack , he says he
 wants just such a fellow as you to learn his business , and
 he ' ll make you a very good offer . And , Jack , that ' s my
 turkey--my Winnie--and nobody but Betty knows anything about
 this box and this letter . I send you all my money out of the
 savings bank  ( I didn ' t tell _anybody_ that ) , and I _want_
 you to come home . You ' ll find the money under the
 cranberries . I thought it would be safe there , and I knew
 you ' d eat them all , you ' re so fond of cranberries . I didn ' t
 tell anybody because I want to surprise them , and besides , 
 let them think you came home because you got ready . It ' s
 nobody ' s business where you got the money anyway . 

 Now do come right home , Jack . You can get here in a week ' s
 time , I know . 

Your affectionate sister , 

JESSIE . 

Jack laid the letter down with a rush of new feelings and thoughts
that overwhelmed him . He sat there for hours; he knew nothing of time . 
He had mechanically turned the cranberry jar upside down and taken
from the bottom , carefully wrapped in white paper , fifty dollars . 

A pang went through him . Well did he know what that money represented
to his sister; by how many sacrifices she had been saving it for a
year or two , with the single purpose of taking the lessons from a
great master that were to fit her to teach , to take an independent
position in the world , to relieve her father , who had lost a large
slice of his comfortable income , and who was growing old and sad under
his burden . She had often talked it over with Jack . 

Now she had generously given up the whole to him , all her hopes and
dreams of independence; and he--he who should have been the support of
his sister , the right arm of his father--he had basely deserted . 

These thoughts and many more surged through his mind that long
afternoon , and when Tom returned as the shadows were growing long , he
sat exactly as he had been left . 

On Tom ' s entrance he roused himself . There was a new light in his eye . 

 " Come , Tom , " he said ,  " dinner ' s waiting . You must be hungry by this
time . " 

 " I am that , " said Tom , who had been through his own mental struggles
meanwhile . 

The two sat down once more to their Thanksgiving dinner , and this time
they managed to eat , though Jack choked whenever he thought of tasting
a bit of Jessie ' s pet turkey , Winnie; and much as he liked turkey , and
a home turkey at that , he could not touch it . 

After the meal , when the provisions were stored away in the cupboard
 ( a soap box ) much too small for such a supply , it had grown quite
dark , and the two , still disinclined to talk , went to their beds--if
the rough bunks they occupied may be dignified by that name . 

But not to sleep--at least not Jack , who tumbled and tossed all night
and got up in the morning with an energy and life he had not shown for
weeks . 

After breakfast Tom shouldered his pick and said : 

 " I ' ll go on , Jack , while you clear up . " Yet he felt in his heart he
should never see Jack again; for there was a homestruck look in his
face that the man of experience in the ways of runaway boys knew well . 

He was not surprised that Jack did not join him , nor that when he
returned at night to the cabin he found him gone and a note pinned up
on the door : 

 I can ' t stand it--I ' m off for home . You may have my share of
 everything . 

 JACK . 

It was a cold evening in early December , and there seemed to be an
undercurrent of excitement in the Jarvis household . The table was
spread in the dining-room with the best silver and linen . Mrs . Jarvis
was better , and had even been able to go into the kitchen to
superintend the preparations for dinner . 

Jessie went around with a shining face that no one understood and she
could not explain . 

Betty was strangely nervous , and had made several blunders that
morning which mortified the faithful servant very much . An air of
expectancy pervaded the whole house , though the two heads of it had
not a hint of the cause . 

Jessie heard the train she had decided to be the important one . She
could hardly contain herself for expectation . She tried hard to sober
herself now and then by the thought ,  " Perhaps he won ' t come , " but she
couldn ' t stay sobered , for she felt as certain that he would as that
she lived . 

You all know how it happened . The door opened and Jack walked in . One
instant of blank silence , and then a grand convulsion . 

Jack fell on his knees with his face in his mother ' s lap , though he
had not thought a moment before of doing any such thing . Jessie hung
over him , frantically hugging him . Mr . Jarvis , vainly trying to join
this group , could only lay his hands on Jack ' s head and say in a
broken voice :  " My son ! My son ! " while Betty performed a war dance
around the party , wildly brandishing a basting spoon in one hand and
wiping her streaming eyes on the dishcloth which she held in the
other . 

It was long before a word could be spoken , and the dinner was totally
ruined , as Betty declared with tears  ( though they were not for
sorrow ) , before any one could calm down enough to eat . 

Then the reaction set in , and justice was done to the dinner , while
talk went on in a stream . Jack did not tell his adventures; he only
said that he had come from the city , where he had made arrangements
for a situation with Uncle John--at which Jessie ' s eyes sparkled . His
looks , even after a week of comfort and hope , spoke for his
sufferings . 

There is little more to tell . Jack Jarvis at seventeen was a different
boy from the Jack who at sixteen started out to seek his fortune . You
may be sure that Jessie had her music lessons after all , and that a
new Winnie with a fine young brood at her heels stalked about the
Jarvis grounds the next spring . 


