There was once a very rich gentleman who lost his wife , and having loved
her exceedingly , he was very sorry when she died . Finding himself quite
unhappy for her loss , he resolved to marry a second time , thinking by
this means he should be as happy as before . Unfortunately , however , the
lady he chanced to fix upon was the proudest and most haughty woman ever
known; she was always out of humour with every one; nobody could please
her , and she returned the civilities of those about her with the most
affronting disdain . She had two daughters by a former husband . These she
brought up to be proud and idle . Indeed , in temper and behaviour they
perfectly resembled their mother; they did not love their books , and
would not learn to work; in short they were disliked by every body . The
gentleman on his side too had a daughter , who in sweetness of temper and
carriage was the exact likeness of her own mother , whose death he had so
much lamented , and whose tender care of the little girl he was in hopes
to see replaced by that of his new bride . But scarcely was the marriage
ceremony over , before his wife began to show her real temper . She could
not bear the pretty little girl , because her sweet obliging manners made
those of her own daughters appear a thousand times the more odious and
disagreeable . She therefore ordered her to live in the kitchen; and , if
ever she brought any thing into the parlour , always scolded her till she
was out of sight . She made her work with the servants in washing the
dishes , and rubbing the tables and chairs; it was her place to clean
madam ' s chamber , and that of the misses her daughters , which was all
inlaid , had beds of the newest fashion , and looking-glasses so long and
broad , that they saw themselves from head to foot in them; while the
little creature herself was forced to sleep up in a sorry garret , upon a
wretched straw bed , without curtains , or any thing to make her
comfortable . The poor child bore this with the greatest patience , not
daring to complain to her father , who , she feared , would only reprove
her , for she saw that his wife governed him entirely . When she had done
all her work she used to sit in the chimney-corner among the cinders; so
that in the house she went by the name of Cinderbreech . The youngest of
the two sisters , however , being rather more civil than the eldest , 
called her Cinderella . And Cinderella , dirty and ragged as she was , as
often happens in such cases , was a thousand times prettier than her
sisters , drest out in all their splendour . It happened that the king ' s
son gave a ball , to which he invited all the persons of fashion in the
country . Our two misses were of the number , for the king ' s son did not
know how disagreeable they were , but supposed , as they were so much
indulged , that they were extremely amiable . He did not invite
Cinderella , for he had never seen or heard of her . 

The two sisters began immediately to be very busy in preparing for the
happy day . Nothing could exceed their joy . Every moment of their time
was spent in fancying such gowns , shoes , and head-dresses as would set
them off to the greatest advantage . All this was new vexation to poor
Cinderella , for it was she who ironed and plaited her sisters ' linen . 
They talked of nothing but how they should be dressed :  " I , " said the
eldest ,  " will wear my scarlet velvet with French trimming . "  " And I , " 
said the youngest ,  " shall wear the same petticoat I had made for the
last ball . But then , to make amends for that , I shall put on my gold
muslin train , and wear my diamonds in my hair; with these I must
certainly look well . " They sent several miles for the best hair dresser
that was to be had , and all their ornaments were bought at the most
fashionable shops . On the morning of the ball , they called up Cinderella
to consult with her about their dress , for they knew she had a great
deal of taste . Cinderella gave them the best advice she could , and even
offered to assist in adjusting their head-dresses; which was exactly
what they wanted , and they accordingly accepted her proposal . While
Cinderella was busily engaged in dressing her sisters , they said to her , 
 " Should you not like , Cinderella , to go to the ball ? "  " Ah ! " replied
Cinderella ,  " you are only laughing at me , it is not for such as I am to
think of going to balls . "  " You are in the right , " said they ,  " folks
might laugh indeed , to see a Cinderbreech dancing in a ball room . " Any
other than Cinderella would have tried to make the haughty creatures
look as ugly as she could; but the sweet tempered girl on the contrary , 
did every thing she could think of to make them look well . The sisters
had scarcely eaten any thing for two days , so great was their joy as the
happy day drew near . More than a dozen laces were broken in endeavouring
to give them a fine slender shape , and they were always before the
looking glass . At length the much wished for moment arrived; the proud
misses stepped into a beautiful carriage , and , followed by servants in
rich liveries , drove towards the palace . Cinderella followed them with
her eyes as far as she could; and when they were out of sight , she sat
down in a corner and began to cry . Her godmother , who saw her in tears , 
asked her what ailed her .  " I wish----I w-i-s-h-- " sobbed poor
Cinderella , without being able to say another word . The godmother , who
was a fairy , said to her ,  " You wish to go to the ball , Cinderella , is
not this the truth ? "  " Alas ! yes , " replied the poor child , sobbing still
more than before .  " Well , well , be a good girl , " said the godmother ,  " and
you shall go . " She then led Cinderella to her bedchamber , and said to
her :  " Run into the garden and bring me a pumpkin . " Cinderella flew like
lightning , and brought the finest she could lay hold of . Her godmother
scooped out the inside , leaving nothing but the rind; she then struck it
with her wand , and the pumpkin instantly became a fine coach gilded all
over with gold . She then looked into her mouse-trap , where she found six
mice all alive and brisk . She told Cinderella to lift up the door of the
trap very gently; and as the mice passed out , she touched them one by
one with her wand , and each immediately became a beautiful horse of a
fine dapple gray mouse colour .  " Here , my child , " said the godmother ,  " is
a coach and horses too , as handsome as your sisters ' , but what shall we
do for a postillion ? "  " I will run , " replied Cinderella ,  " and see if
there be not a rat in the trap . If I find one , he will do very well for
a postillion . "  " Well thought of , my child , " said her godmother;  " make
what haste you can . " 

Cinderella brought the rat trap , which , to her great joy , contained
three of the largest rats ever seen . The fairy chose the one which had
the longest beard; and touching him with her wand , he was instantly
turned into a handsome postillion , with the finest pair of whiskers
imaginable . She next said to Cinderella :  " Go again into the garden , and
you will find six lizards behind the watering-pot; bring them hither . " 
This was no sooner done , than with a stroke from the fairy ' s wand they
were changed into six footmen , who all jumped up behind the coach in
their laced liveries , and stood side by side as cleverly as if they had
been used to nothing else the whole of their lives . The fairy then said
to Cinderella :  " Well , my dear , is not this such an equipage as you could
wish for to take you to the ball ? Are you not delighted with it ? " 
 " Y-e-s , " replied Cinderella with hesitation ,  " but must I go thither in
these filthy rags ? " Her godmother touched her with the wand , and her
rags instantly became the most magnificent apparel , ornamented with the
most costly jewels in the whole world . To these she added a beautiful
pair of glass slippers , and bade her set out for the palace . The fairy , 
however , before she took leave of Cinderella , strictly charged her on no
account whatever to stay at the ball after the clock had struck twelve , 
telling her that , should she stay but a single moment after that time , 
her coach would again become a pumpkin , her horses mice , her footmen
lizards , and her fine clothes be changed to filthy rags . Cinderella did
not fail to promise all her godmother desired of her; and almost wild
with joy drove away to the palace . As soon as she arrived , the king ' s
son , who had been informed that a great princess , whom nobody knew , was
come to the ball , presented himself at the door of her carriage , helped
her out , and conducted her to the ball room . Cinderella no sooner
appeared than every one was silent; both the dancing and the music
stopped , and every body was employed in gazing at the uncommon beauty of
this unknown stranger . Nothing was heard but whispers of  " How handsome
she is ! " The king himself , old as he was , could not keep his eyes from
her , and continually repeated to the queen , that it was a long time
since he had seen so lovely a creature . The ladies endeavoured to find
out how her clothes were made , that they might get some of the same
pattern for themselves by the next day , should they be lucky enough to
meet with such handsome materials , and such good work-people to make
them . 

The king ' s son conducted her to the most honourable seat , and soon after
took her out to dance with him . She both moved and danced so gracefully , 
that every one admired her still more than before , and she was thought
the most beautiful and accomplished lady they ever beheld . After some
time a delicious collation was served up; but the young prince was so
busily employed in looking at her , that he did not eat a morsel . 
Cinderella seated herself near her sisters , paid them a thousand
attentions , and offered them a part of the oranges and sweetmeats with
which the prince had presented her , while they on their part were quite
astonished at these civilities from a lady whom they did not know . As
they were conversing together , Cinderella heard the clock strike eleven
and three quarters . She rose from her seat , curtesied to the company , 
and hastened away as fast as she could . As soon as she got home she flew
to her godmother , and , after thanking her a thousand times , told her she
would give the world to be able to go again to the ball the next day , 
for the king ' s son had entreated her to be there . While she was telling
her godmother every thing that had happened to her at the ball , the two
sisters knocked a loud rat-tat-tat at the door; which Cinderella opened . 
 " How late you have stayed ! " said she , yawning , rubbing her eyes , and
stretching herself , as if just awakened out of her sleep , though she had
in truth felt no desire for sleep since they left her .  " If you had been
at the ball , " said one of her sisters ,  " let me tell you , you would not
have been sleepy . There came thither the handsomest , yes , the very
handsomest princess ever beheld ! She paid us a thousand attentions , and
made us take a part of the oranges and sweetmeats the prince had given
her . " Cinderella could scarcely contain herself for joy : she asked her
sisters the name of this princess , to which they replied , that nobody
had been able to discover who she was; that the king ' s son was extremely
grieved on that account , and had offered a large reward to any person
who could find out where she came from . Cinderella smiled , and said : 
 " How very beautiful she must be ! How fortunate you are ! Ah , could I but
see her for a single moment ! Dear Miss Charlotte , lend me only the
yellow gown you wear every day , and let me go to see her . "  " Oh ! yes , I
warrant you; lend my clothes to a Cinderbreech ! Do you really suppose me
such a fool ? No , no; pray , Miss Forward , mind your proper business , and
leave dress and balls to your betters . " Cinderella expected some such
answer , and was by no means sorry , for she would have been sadly at a
loss what to do if her sister had lent her the clothes that she asked of
her . 

The next day the two sisters again appeared at the ball , and so did
Cinderella , but dressed much more magnificently than the night before . 
The king ' s son was continually by her side , and said the most obliging
things imaginable to her . The charming young creature was far from being
tired of all the agreeable things she met with . On the contrary , she was
so delighted with them that she entirely forgot the charge her godmother
had given her . Cinderella at last heard the striking of a clock , and
counted one , two , three , on till she came to twelve , though she thought
that it could be but eleven at most . She got up and flew as nimbly as a
deer out of the ball-room . The prince tried to overtake her; but poor
Cinderella ' s fright made her run the faster . However , in her great
hurry , she dropped one of her glass slippers from her foot , which the
prince stooped down and picked up , and took the greatest care of it
possible . Cinderella got home tired and out of breath , in her old
clothes , without either coach or footmen , and having nothing left of her
magnificence but the fellow of the glass slipper which she had dropped . 
In the mean while , the prince had inquired of all his guards at the
palace gates , if they had not seen a magnificent princess pass out , and
which way she went ? The guards replied , that no princess had passed the
gates; and that they had not seen a creature but a little ragged girl , 
who looked more like a beggar than a princess . When the two sisters
returned from the ball , Cinderella asked them if they had been as much
amused as the night before , and if the beautiful princess had been
there ? They told her that she had; but that as soon as the clock struck
twelve , she hurried away from the ball room , and in the great haste she
had made , had dropped one of her glass slippers , which was the prettiest
shape that could be; that the king ' s son had picked it up , and had done
nothing but look at it all the rest of the evening; and that every body
believed he was violently in love with the handsome lady to whom it
belonged . 

This was very true; for a few days after , the prince had it proclaimed , 
by sound of trumpet , that he would marry the lady whose foot should
exactly fit the slipper he had found . Accordingly the prince ' s
messengers took the slipper , and carried it first to all the princesses , 
then to the duchesses , in short , to all the ladies of the court . But
without success . They then brought it to the two sisters , who each tried
all she could to squeeze her foot into the slipper , but saw at last that
this was quite impossible . Cinderella who was looking at them all the
while , and knew her slipper , could not help smiling , and ventured to
say ,  " Pray , sir , let me try to get on the slipper . " The gentleman made
her sit down; and putting the slipper to her foot , it instantly slipped
in , and he saw that it fitted her like wax . The two sisters were amazed
to see that the slipper fitted Cinderella; but how much greater was
their astonishment when she drew out of her pocket the other slipper and
put it on ! Just at this moment the fairy entered the room , and touching
Cinderella ' s clothes with her wand , made her all at once appear more
magnificently dressed than they had ever seen her before . 

The two sisters immediately perceived that she was the beautiful
princess they had seen at the ball . They threw themselves at her feet , 
and asked her forgiveness for the ill treatment she had received from
them . Cinderella helped them to rise , and , tenderly embracing them , said
that she forgave them with all her heart , and begged them to bestow on
her their affection . Cinderella was then conducted , dressed as she was , 
to the young prince , who finding her more beautiful than ever , instantly
desired her to accept of his hand . The marriage ceremony took place in a
few days; and Cinderella , who was as amiable as she was handsome , gave
her sisters magnificent apartments in the palace , and a short time after
married them to two great lords of the court . 


