In the reign of the famous King Arthur , there lived near the Land ' s End
of England , in the county of Cornwall , a worthy farmer , who had an only
son named Jack . Jack was a boy of a bold temper; he took pleasure in
hearing or reading stories of wizards , conjurers , giants , and fairies , 
and used to listen eagerly while his father talked of the great deeds of
the brave knights of King Arthur ' s Round Table . When Jack was sent to
take care of the sheep and oxen in the fields , he used to amuse himself
with planning battles , sieges , and the means to conquer or surprise a
foe . He was above the common sports of children; but hardly any one
could equal him at wrestling; or , if he met with a match for himself in
strength , his skill and address always made him the victor . In those
days there lived on St . Michael ' s Mount of Cornwall , which rises out of
the sea at some distance from the main land , a huge giant . He was
eighteen feet high , and three yards round; and his fierce and savage
looks were the terror of all his neighbours . He dwelt in a gloomy cavern
on the very top of the mountain , and used to wade over to the main land
in search of his prey . When he came near , the people left their houses;
and after he had glutted his appetite upon their cattle , he would throw
half-a-dozen oxen upon his back , and tie three times as many sheep and
hogs round his waist , and so march back to his own abode . The giant had
done this for many years , and the coast of Cornwall was greatly hurt by
his thefts , when Jack boldly resolved to destroy him . He therefore took
a horn , a shovel , pickaxe , and a dark lantern , and early in a long
winter ' s evening he swam to the mount . There he fell to work at once , 
and before morning he had dug a pit twenty-two feet deep , and almost as
many broad . He covered it over with sticks and straw , and strewed some
of the earth over them , to make it look just like solid ground . He then
put his horn to his mouth , and blew such a loud and long tantivy , that
the giant awoke and came towards Jack , roaring like thunder :  " You saucy
villain , you shall pay dearly for breaking my rest; I will broil you for
my breakfast . " He had scarcely spoken these words , when he came
advancing one step farther; but then he tumbled headlong into the pit , 
and his fall shook the very mountain .  " O ho , Mr . Giant ! " said Jack , 
looking into the pit ,  " have you found your way so soon to the bottom ? 
How is your appetite now ? Will nothing serve you for breakfast this cold
morning but broiling poor Jack ? " The giant now tried to rise , but Jack
struck him a blow on the crown of the head with his pickaxe , which
killed him at once . Jack then made haste back to rejoice his friends
with the news of the giant ' s death . When the justices of Cornwall heard
of this valiant action , they sent for Jack , and declared that he should
always be called Jack the Giant Killer; and they also gave him a sword
and belt , upon which was written in letters of gold : 

  " This is the valiant Cornishman
 Who slew the Giant Cormoran . " 

The news of Jack ' s exploits soon spread over the western parts of
England; and another giant , called Old Blunderbore , vowed to have
revenge on Jack , if it should ever be his fortune to get him into his
power . This giant kept an enchanted castle in the midst of a lonely
wood . About four months after the death of Cormoran , as Jack was taking
a journey into Wales , he passed through this wood; and as he was very
weary , he sat down to rest by the side of a pleasant fountain , and there
he fell into a deep sleep . The giant came to the fountain for water just
at this time , and found Jack there; and as the lines on Jack ' s belt
showed who he was , the giant lifted him up and laid him gently upon his
shoulder to carry him to his castle : but as he passed through the
thicket , the rustling of the leaves waked Jack; and he was sadly afraid
when he found himself in the clutches of Blunderbore . Yet this was
nothing to his fright soon after; for when they reached the castle , he
beheld the floor covered all over with the skulls and bones of men and
women . The giant took him into a large room where lay the hearts and
limbs of persons who had been lately killed; and he told Jack , with a
horrid grin , that men ' s hearts , eaten with pepper and vinegar , were his
nicest food; and also , that he thought he should make a dainty meal on
his heart . When he had said this , he locked Jack up in that room , while
he went to fetch another giant who lived in the same wood , to enjoy a
dinner off Jack ' s flesh with him . While he was away , Jack heard dreadful
shrieks , groans , and cries , from many parts of the castle; and soon
after he heard a mournful voice repeat these lines : 

  " Haste , valiant stranger , haste away , 
 Lest you become the giant ' s prey . 
 On his return he ' ll bring another , 
 Still more savage than his brother : 
 A horrid , cruel monster , who , 
 Before he kills , will torture you . 
 Oh valiant stranger , haste away , 
 Or you ' ll become these giants ' prey . " 

This warning was so shocking to poor Jack , that he was ready to go mad . 
He ran to the window , and saw the two giants coming along arm in arm . 
This window was right over the gates of the castle .  " Now , " thought Jack , 
 " either my death or freedom is at hand . " There were two strong cords in
the room : Jack made a large noose with a slip-knot at the ends of both
these , and as the giants were coming through the gates , he threw the
ropes over their heads . He then made the other ends fast to a beam in
the ceiling , and pulled with all his might till he had almost strangled
them . When he saw that they were both quite black in the face , and had
not the least strength left , he drew his sword , and slid down the ropes;
he then killed the giants , and thus saved himself from the cruel death
they meant to put him to . Jack next took a great bunch of keys from the
pocket of Blunderbore , and went into the castle again . He made a strict
search through all the rooms; and in them found three ladies tied up by
the hair of their heads , and almost starved to death . They told him that
their husbands had been killed by the giants , who had then condemned
them to be starved to death , because they would not eat the flesh of
their own dead husbands .  " Ladies , " said Jack ,  " I have put an end to the
monster and his wicked brother; and I give you this castle and all the
riches it contains , to make you some amends for the dreadful pains you
have felt . " He then very politely gave them the keys of the castle , and
went further on his journey to Wales . As Jack had not taken any of the
giant ' s riches for himself , and so had very little money of his own , he
thought it best to travel as fast as he could . At length he lost his
way , and when night came on he was in a lonely valley between two lofty
mountains , where he walked about for some hours without seeing any
dwelling place , so he thought himself very lucky at last , in finding a
large and handsome house . 

He went up to it boldly , and knocked loudly at the gate , when , to his
great terror and surprise , there came forth a monstrous giant with two
heads . He spoke to Jack very civilly , for he was a Welsh giant , and all
the mischief he did was by private and secret malice , under the show of
friendship and kindness . Jack told him that he was a traveller who had
lost his way , on which the huge monster made him welcome , and led him
into a room , where there was a good bed to pass the night in . Jack took
off his clothes quickly; but though he was so weary he could not go to
sleep . Soon after this he heard the giant walking backward and forward
in the next room , and saying to himself : 

  " Though here you lodge with me this night , 
 You shall not see the morning light;
 My club shall dash your brains out quite . " 

 " Say you so ? " thought Jack;  " are these your tricks upon travellers ? But
I hope to prove as cunning as you . " Then getting out of bed , he groped
about the room , and at last found a large thick billet of wood; he laid
it in his own place in the bed , and then hid himself in a dark corner of
the room . In the middle of the night the giant came with his great club , 
and struck many heavy blows on the bed , in the very place where Jack had
laid the billet , and then he went back to his own room , thinking he had
broken all his bones . Early in the morning , Jack put a bold face upon
the matter , and walked into the giant ' s room to thank him for his
lodgings . The giant started when he saw him , and he began to stammer
out ,  " Oh , dear me ! Is it you ? Pray , how did you sleep last night ? Did
you hear or see any thing in the dead of the night ? "  " Nothing worth
speaking of , " said Jack carelessly;  " a rat , I believe , gave me three or
four slaps with his tail , and disturbed me a little; but I soon went to
sleep again . " The giant wondered more and more at this; yet he did not
answer a word , but went to bring two great bowls of hasty-pudding for
their breakfast . Jack wished to make the giant believe that he could eat
as much as himself . So he contrived to button a leathern bag inside his
coat , and slipped the hasty-pudding into this bag , while he seemed to
put it into his mouth . When breakfast was over , he said to the giant : 
 " Now I will show you a fine trick; I can cure all wounds with a touch; I
could cut off my head one minute , and the next , put it sound again on my
shoulders : you shall see an example . " He then took hold of the knife , 
ripped up the leathern bag , and all the hasty-pudding tumbled out upon
the floor .  " Ods splutter hur nails , " cried the Welsh giant , who was
ashamed to be outdone by such a little fellow as Jack ,  " hur can do that
hurself . " So he snatched up the knife , plunged it into his stomach , and
in a moment dropped down dead . 

As soon as Jack had thus tricked the Welsh monster , he went farther on
his journey; and a few days after he met with King Arthur ' s only son , 
who had got his father ' s leave to travel into Wales , to deliver a
beautiful lady from the power of a wicked magician , who held her in his
enchantments . When Jack found that the young prince had no servants with
him , he begged leave to attend him; and the prince at once agreed to
this , and gave Jack many thanks for his kindness . The prince was a
handsome , polite , and brave knight , and so good-natured that he gave
money to every body he met . At length he gave his last penny to an old
woman , and then turned to Jack , and said :  " How shall we be able to get
food for ourselves the rest of our journey ? "  " Leave that to me sir , " 
said Jack;  " I will provide for my prince . " Night now came on , and the
prince began to grow uneasy at thinking where they should lodge .  " Sir , " 
said Jack ,  " be of good heart; two miles farther there lives a large
giant , whom I know well . He has three heads , and will fight five hundred
men , and make them fly before him . "  " Alas ! " replied the king ' s son ,  " we
had better never have been born than meet with such a monster . "  " My
lord , leave me to manage him , and wait here in quiet till I return . " The
prince now staid behind , while Jack rode on full speed . And when he came
to the gates of the castle , he gave a loud knock . The giant , with a
voice like thunder , roared out :  " Who is there ? " And Jack made answer , 
and said :  " No one but your poor cousin Jack . "  " Well , " said the giant , 
 " what news , cousin Jack ? "  " Dear uncle , " said Jack ,  " I have some heavy
news . "  " Pooh ! " said the giant ,  " what heavy news can come to me ? I am a
giant with three heads; and can fight five hundred men , and make them
fly before me . "  " Alas ! " said Jack ,  " Here is the king ' s son , coming with
two thousand men , to kill you , and to destroy the castle and all that
you have . "  " Oh , cousin Jack , " said the giant ,  " This is heavy news
indeed ! But I have a large cellar under ground , where I will hide
myself , and you shall lock , and bar me in , and keep the keys till the
king ' s son is gone . " 

Now when Jack had made the giant fast in the vault , he went back and
fetched the prince to the castle; they both made themselves merry with
the wine and other dainties that were in the house . So that night they
rested very pleasantly , while the poor giant lay trembling and shaking
with fear in the cellar under ground . Early in the morning , Jack gave
the king ' s son gold and silver out of the giant ' s treasure , and set him
three miles forward on his journey . He then went to let his uncle out of
the hole , who asked Jack what he should give him as a reward for saving
his castle .  " Why , good uncle , " said Jack ,  " I desire nothing but the old
coat and cap , with the old rusty sword and slippers , which are hanging
at your bed ' s head , " Then said the giant :  " You shall have them; and pray
keep them for my sake , for they are things of great use : the coat will
keep you invisible , the cap will give you knowledge , the sword cut
through anything , and the shoes are of vast swiftness; these may be
useful to you in all times of danger , so take them with all my heart . " 
Jack gave many thanks to the giant , and then set off to the prince . When
he had come up with the king ' s son , they soon arrived at the dwelling of
the beautiful lady , who was under the power of a wicked magician . She
received the prince very politely , and made a noble feast for him; and
when it was ended , she rose , and wiping her mouth with a fine
handkerchief , said :  " My lord , you must submit to the custom of my
palace; to-morrow morning I command you to tell me on whom I bestow this
handkerchief or lose your head . " She then went out of the room . The
young prince went to bed very mournful : but Jack put on his cap of
knowledge , which told him that the lady was forced , by the power of
enchantment , to meet the wicked magician every night in the middle of
the forest . Jack now put on his coat of darkness , and his shoes of
swiftness , and was there before her . When the lady came , she gave the
handkerchief to the magician . Jack with his sword of sharpness , at one
blow , cut off his head; the enchantment was then ended in a moment , and
the lady was restored to her former virtue and goodness . 

She was married to the prince on the next day , and soon after went back
with her royal husband , and a great company , to the court of King
Arthur , where they were received with loud and joyful welcomes; and the
valiant hero Jack , for the many great exploits he had done for the good
of his country , was made one of the Knights of the Round Table . As Jack
had been so lucky in all his adventures , he resolved not to be idle for
the future , but still to do what services he could for the honour of the
king and the nation . He therefore humbly begged his majesty to furnish
him with a horse and money , that he might travel in search of new and
strange exploits .  " For , " said he to the king ,  " there are many giants yet
living in the remote parts of Wales , to the great terror and distress of
your majesty ' s subjects; therefore if it please you , sire , to favour me
in my design , I will soon rid your kingdom of these giants and monsters
in human shape . " Now when the king heard this offer , and began to think
of the cruel deeds of these blood-thirsty giants and savage monsters , he
gave Jack every thing proper for such a journey . After this Jack took
leave of the king , the prince , and all the knights , and set off; taking
with him his cap of knowledge , his sword of sharpness , his shoes of
swiftness , and his invisible coat , the better to perform the great
exploits that might fall in his way . He went along over high hills and
lofty mountains , and on the third day he came to a large wide forest , 
through which his road led . He had hardly entered the forest , when on a
sudden he heard very dreadful shrieks and cries . He forced his way
through the trees , and saw a monstrous giant dragging along by the hair
of their heads a handsome knight and his beautiful lady . Their tears and
cries melted the heart of honest Jack to pity and compassion; he
alighted from his horse , and tying him to an oak tree he put on his
invisible coat , under which he carried his sword of sharpness . 

When he came up to the giant , he made several strokes at him , but could
not reach his body , on account of the enormous height of the terrible
creature , but he wounded his thighs in several places; and at length , 
putting both hands to his sword , and aiming with all his might , he cut
off both the giant ' s legs just below the garter; and the trunk of his
body tumbling to the ground , made not only the trees shake , but the
earth itself tremble with the force of his fall . Then Jack , setting his
foot upon his neck , exclaimed ,  " Thou barbarous and savage wretch , behold
I come to execute upon thee the just reward for all thy crimes; " and
instantly plunged his sword into the giant ' s body . The huge monster gave
a hideous groan , and yielded up his life into the hands of the
victorious Jack the Giant Killer , whilst the noble knight and the
virtuous lady were both joyful spectators of his sudden death and their
deliverance . The courteous knight and his fair lady , not only returned
Jack hearty thanks for their deliverance , but also invited him to their
house , to refresh himself after his dreadful encounter , as likewise to
receive a reward for his good services .  " No , " said Jack ,  " I cannot be at
ease till I find out the den that was the monster ' s habitation . " The
knight on hearing this grew very sorrowful , and replied ,  " Noble
stranger , it is too much to run a second hazard; this monster lived in a
den under yonder mountain , with a brother of his , more fierce and cruel
than himself; therefore , if you should go thither , and perish in the
attempt , it would be a heart-breaking thing to me and my lady; so let me
persuade you to go with us , and desist from any farther pursuit . "  " Nay , " 
answered Jack ,  " if there be another , even if there were twenty , I would
shed the last drop of blood in my body before one of them should escape
my fury . When I have finished this task , I will come and pay my respects
to you . " So when they had told him where to find them again , he got on
his horse and went after the dead giant ' s brother . 

Jack had not rode a mile and a half , before he came in sight of the
mouth of the cavern; and nigh the entrance of it , he saw the other giant
sitting on a huge block of fine timber , with a knotted iron club lying
by his side , waiting for his brother . His eyes looked like flames of
fire , his face was grim and ugly , and his cheeks seemed like two
flitches of bacon; the bristles of his beard seemed to be thick rods of
iron wire; and his long locks of hair hung down upon his broad shoulders
like curling snakes . Jack got down from his horse , and turned him into a
thicket; then he put on his coat of darkness , and drew a little nearer
to behold this figure , and said softly :  " Oh , monster ! are you there ? It
will not be long before I shall take you fast by the beard . " The giant
all this while , could not see him , by reason of his invisible coat : so
Jack came quite close to him , and struck a blow at his head with his
sword of sharpness , but he missed his aim , and only cut off his nose , 
which made him roar like loud claps of thunder . And though he rolled his
glaring eyes round on every side , he could not see who had given him the
blow; yet he took up his iron club , and began to lay about him like one
that was mad with pain and fury . 

 " Nay , " said Jack ,  " if this be the case I will kill you at once . " So
saying , he slipped nimbly behind him , and jumping upon the block of
timber , as the giant rose from it , he stabbed him in the back; when , 
after a few howls , he dropped down dead . Jack cut off his head , and sent
it with the head of his brother , whom he had killed before in the
forest , to King Arthur , by a wagon which he hired for that purpose , with
an account of all his exploits . When Jack had thus killed these two
monsters , he went into their cave in search of their treasure : he passed
through many turnings and windings , which led him to a room paved with
freestone; at the end of it was a boiling caldron , and on the right hand
stood a large table where the giants used to dine . He then came to a
window that was secured with iron bars , through which he saw a number of
wretched captives , who cried out when they saw Jack ,  " Alas ! alas ! young
man , you are come to be one among us in this horrid den . "  " I hope , " said
Jack ,  " you will not stay here long; but pray tell me what is the meaning
of your being here at all ? "  " Alas ! " said one poor old man ,  " I will tell
you , sir . We are persons that have been taken by the giants who hold
this cave , and are kept till they choose to have a feast , then one of us
is to be killed , and cooked to please their taste . It is not long since
they took three for the same purpose . "  " Well , " said Jack ,  " I have given
them such a dinner that it will be long enough before they have any
more . " The captives were amazed at his words .  " You may believe me , " said
Jack;  " for I have killed them both with the edge of the sword , and have
sent their large heads to the court of King Arthur , as marks of my great
success . " 

To show them that what he said was true , he unlocked the gate , and set
them all free . Then he led them to the great room , placed them round the
table , and set before them two quarters of beef , with bread and wine;
upon which they feasted to their fill . When supper was over , they
searched the giants ' coffers , and Jack shared the store in them among
the captives , who thanked him for their escape . The next morning they
set off to their homes , and Jack to the knight ' s house , whom he had left
with his lady not long before . It was just at the time of sunrise that
Jack mounted his horse to proceed on his journey . 

He arrived at the knight ' s house , where he was received with the
greatest joy by the thankful knight and his lady , who , in honour of
Jack ' s exploits , gave a grand feast , to which all the nobles and gentry
were invited . When the company were assembled , the knight declared to
them the great actions of Jack , and gave him , as a mark of respect , a
fine ring , on which was engraved the picture of the giant dragging the
knight and the lady by the hair , with this motto round it : 

  " Behold , in dire distress were we , 
 Under a giant ' s fierce command;
 But gained our lives and liberty , 
 From valiant Jack ' s victorious hand . " 

Among the guests then present were five aged gentlemen , who were fathers
to some of those captives who had been freed by Jack from the dungeon of
the giants . As soon as they heard that he was the person who had done
such wonders , they pressed round him with tears of joy , to return him
thanks for the happiness he had caused to them . After this the bowl went
round , and every one drank to the health and long life of the gallant
hero . Mirth increased , and the hall was filled with peals of laughter
and joyful cries . But , on a sudden , a herald , pale and breathless with
haste and terror , rushed into the midst of the company , and told them
that Thundel , a savage giant with two heads , had heard of the death of
his two kinsmen , and was come to take his revenge on Jack; and that he
was now within a mile of the house; the people flying before him like
chaff before the wind . At this news the very boldest of the guests
trembled; but Jack drew his sword , and said :  " Let him come , I have a rod
for him also . Pray , ladies and gentlemen , do me the favour to walk into
the garden , and you shall soon behold the giant ' s defeat and death . " To
this they all agreed , and heartily wished him success in his dangerous
attempt . The knight ' s house stood in the middle of a moat , thirty feet
deep and twenty wide , over which lay a drawbridge . Jack set men to work
to cut the bridge on both sides , almost to the middle; and then dressed
himself in his coat of darkness , and went against the giant with his
sword of sharpness . As he came close to him , though the giant could not
see him , for his invisible coat , yet he found some danger was near , 
which made him cry out : 

  " Fa , fe , fi , fo , fum , 
 I smell the blood of an Englishman;
 Let him be alive , or let him be dead , 
 I ' ll grind his bones to make me bread . " 

 " Say you so my friend ? " said Jack ,  " you are a monstrous miller indeed . " 
 " Art thou , " cried the giant ,  " the villain that killed my kinsmen ? Then I
will tear thee with my teeth , and grind thy bones to powder . "  " You must
catch me first , " said Jack; and throwing off his coat of darkness , and
putting on his shoes of swiftness , he began to run; the giant following
him like a walking castle , making the earth shake at every step . 

Jack led him round and round the walls of the house , that the company
might see the monster; and to finish the work Jack ran over the
drawbridge , the giant going after him with his club . But when the giant
came to the middle , where the bridge had been cut on both sides , the
great weight of his body made it break , and he tumbled into the water , 
and rolled about like a large whale . Jack now stood by the side of the
moat , and laughed and jeered at him , saying :  " I think you told me , you
would grind my bones to powder . When will you begin ? " The giant foamed
at both his horrid mouths with fury , and plunged from side to side of
the moat; but he could not get out to have revenge on his little foe . At
last Jack ordered a cart rope to be brought to him . He then drew it over
his two heads , and by the help of a team of horses , dragged him to the
edge of the moat , where he cut off the monster ' s heads; and before he
either eat or drank , he sent them both to the court of King Arthur . He
then went back to the table with the company , and the rest of the day
was spent in mirth and good cheer . After staying with the knight for
some time , Jack grew weary of such an idle life , and set out again in
search of new adventures . He went over the hills and dales without
meeting any , till he came to the foot of a very high mountain . Here he
knocked at the door of a small and lonely house; and an old man , with a
head as white as snow , let him in .  " Good father " said Jack ,  " can you
lodge a traveller who has lost his way ? "  " Yes , " said the hermit ,  " I can , 
if you will accept such fare as my poor house affords . " Jack entered , 
and the old man set before him some bread and fruit for his supper . When
Jack had eaten as much as he chose , the hermit said ,  " My son , I know you
are the famous conqueror of giants; now , on the top of this mountain is
an enchanted castle , kept by a giant named Galligantus , who , by the help
of a vile magician , gets many knights into his castle , where he changes
them into the shape of beasts . Above all I lament the hard fate of a
duke ' s daughter , whom they seized as she was walking in her father ' s
garden , and brought hither through the air in a chariot drawn by two
fiery dragons , and turned her into the shape of a deer . Many knights
have tried to destroy the enchantment , and deliver her; yet none have
been able to do it , by reason of two fiery griffins who guard the gate
of the castle , and destroy all who come nigh . But as you , my son , have
an invisible coat , you may pass by them without being seen; and on the
gates of the castle , you will find engraved , by what means the
enchantment may be broken . " 

Jack promised , that in the morning , at the risk of his life he would
break the enchantment : and after a sound sleep he arose early , put on
his invisible coat , and got ready for the attempt . When he had climbed
to the top of the mountain , he saw the two fiery griffins; but he passed
between them without the least fear of danger; for they could not see
him because of his invisible coat . On the castle gate he found a golden
trumpet , under which were written these lines : 

  " Whoever can this trumpet blow , 
 Shall cause the giant ' s overthrow . " 

As soon as Jack had read this , he seized the trumpet , and blew a shrill
blast which made the gates fly open and the very castle itself tremble . 
The giant and the conjurer now knew that their wicked course was at an
end , and they stood biting their thumbs and shaking with fear . Jack , 
with his sword of sharpness , soon killed the giant . The magician was
then carried away by a whirlwind and every knight and beautiful lady , 
who had been changed into birds and beasts , returned to their proper
shapes . The castle vanished away like smoke and the head of the giant
Galligantus was sent to King Arthur . The knights and ladies rested that
night at the old man ' s hermitage , and next day they set out for the
court . Jack then went up to the king , and gave his majesty an account of
all his fierce battles . Jack ' s fame had spread through the whole
country; and at the king ' s desire , the duke gave him his daughter in
marriage , to the joy of all the kingdom . After this the king gave him a
large estate; on which he and his lady lived the rest of their days , in
joy and content . 


