
Sindbad the sailor , after all his adventures and wanderings , settled
down in happiness and prosperity in Bagdad . Here are the stories which
he told to his friends of his seven marvelous voyages . 


THE FIRST VOYAGE

My father died while I was young and left me a fortune . Having no one to
restrain me , I fell into bad ways , by which I not only wasted my time , 
but injured my health , and destroyed my property . 

When I recovered , I collected together what was left of my fortune , and
bought merchandise , which I loaded on board a vessel for the port of
Balsora . 


During the voyage we touched at several islands , where we sold or
exchanged our goods . We were one day becalmed near a small island . As
its appearance was inviting , we determined to dine upon it . But while we
were laughing and preparing for dinner , the island began to move , and at
the same moment the people in the ship called out that we were on the
back of a monstrous whale . Some jumped into the boat , and others swam to
the ship; but before I could get off the animal dived into the sea , and
I had only time to catch hold of a piece of wood that had been brought
from the ship to serve as a table . Upon this piece of timber I was
carried away by the current . The others reached the vessel , but a gale
sprang up and the ship sailed without me . I floated during that and the
next night , but the following morning was thrown on a small island . 

I found fresh water and fruit . I looked about for some house , but found
none . There were a number of colts grazing together , but no traces of
other animals . When evening approached I took some more fruit and
climbed in a tree to sleep . About midnight the sound of trumpets and
drums seemed to pass around the island , which continued until morning , 
when again it seemed to be uninhabited . On the next day I found that the
island was small , and that no other land was in sight . I therefore gave
myself up as lost . Nor were my fears lessened when I found that the
shore abounded with enormous serpents and other sea monsters . I found , 
however , that they were timid , and that the rattling of sticks would
make them dive into the water . 


I climbed the tree next night , and the drums and trumpets returned as
before . On the third day , I had the satisfaction of seeing a body of
men , who , on landing , were astonished to see me there . Having related
to them how I came hither , they told me they were grooms of King
Mihrage; that the island belonged to genii , who visited it every night
with drums and trumpets; that the genii had allowed their sovereign to
train his colts upon the island; and that they , being sent every six
months to select some , had arrived for that purpose . 

The grooms carried me to King Mihrage , who allowed me apartments in his
palace . 

One day I saw men unloading a ship in the harbor , and saw that some of
the bales were those which I had sent to Balsora . Going up to the
captain , I said : 

 " Captain , I am Sindbad . " 

 " Surely , " said he ,  " I and the passengers saw Sindbad swallowed in the
waves many hundred miles away . " 

Some others , however , coming up , I was recognized; and the captain then
restored me the bales , with many congratulations . I made a valuable
present to King Mihrage , who bestowed a rich gift on me in return; and , 
having made some advantageous purchases , I arrived at Balsora , where , 
after I had sold my goods , I found myself possessed of a hundred
thousand sequins . 
