Becoming weary of a quiet life in Balsora , and having bought trading
goods , I again went to sea with some merchants . After touching at
several places , we landed at an uninhabited island . We amused ourselves
in different ways , but I , having taken my wine and provisions , sat down
and fell asleep . When I awoke , I found that my companions were gone , and
that the ship had sailed . I climbed to the top of a very high tree , and
perceived at a distance an object that was very large and white . I
descended to the ground , and ran toward this strange-looking object . 
When I approached it I found it was about fifty paces in circumference , 
quite round , and as smooth as ivory , but had no sort of opening . It was
now almost sunset , and suddenly the sky became darkened . I looked up and
beheld a bird of enormous size , moving like a prodigious cloud toward
me . I recollected that I had heard of a bird called the roc , so large
that it could carry away young elephants , and I therefore conjectured
that the large object I had been looking at was the egg of this bird . 

As the bird approached I crept close to the egg , so that I had one of
the legs of this winged animal before me when it alighted . This limb
being as large as the trunk of a tree , I tied myself firmly to it with
my turban . 


The next morning the bird flew away , and carried me from this desert
island . I was borne so high that I could not see the earth , and then
carried downward so swiftly that I lost my senses . When I recovered , I
was on the ground . I quickly untied the cloth that bound me , and
scarcely was I free when the bird , having taken up a large serpent , 
again flew away . I found myself in a deep valley , the sides of which
were too steep to be climbed . As I walked up and down in despair I
noticed that the valley was covered with diamonds of enormous size . But
I soon saw other objects of much less agreeable appearance . Immense
serpents were peeping out of holes on every side . When night came , I
took shelter in a cave , the entrance of which I guarded with the largest
stones I could find , but the hissing of the serpents entirely deprived
me of sleep . When day returned , the serpents retired to their holes; and
I came out of my cave , but with extreme fear . I walked heedless of the
serpents until I became weary , and then sat down and fell asleep . I was
awakened by something which fell near me . It was a large piece of fresh
meat , and presently I saw several other pieces . 

I was now convinced that I must be in the famous valley of diamonds , and
that the pieces of meat were thrown in by merchants , who expected eagles
to pounce upon the flesh , to which diamonds were almost sure to
adhere . I hastened to pick up some of the largest diamonds I could find , 
which I put into a little bag , and fastened it to my girdle . I then
selected the largest piece of flesh in the valley , which I tied to my
waist with the cloth of my turban , and then lay down upon my face to
wait for the eagles . Very soon one of the strongest pounced upon the
meat on my back , and flew with me to its nest on the top of the
mountain . The merchants began shouting to frighten the eagles , and when
they had forced the birds to quit their prey , one of them came to the
nest where I was . At first the man was frightened when he saw me there , 
but after recovering himself , asked me how I got there . I told him and
the rest of the merchants my story . I then opened my bag , and they
declared that they had never seen diamonds of equal luster and size with
mine . The merchants having gathered their diamonds together , we left the
place the next morning , and crossed the mountains until we reached a
port . We there took ship and proceeded to the island of Roha . At that
place I exchanged some of my diamonds for other merchandise , and we went
on to Balsora . From Balsora I reached my native city , Bagdad , in which I
lived easily upon the vast riches I had won . 



THE THIRD VOYAGE

I soon resolved upon a third voyage , and once more took ship at Balsora . 
After we had been at sea a few weeks , we were overtaken by a dreadful
storm , and were obliged to cast anchor near an island which the captain
had endeavored to avoid; for he assured us that it was inhabited by
pigmy savages , covered with hair , who would speedily attack us in great
numbers . Soon an innumerable multitude of frightful savages , about two
feet high , boarded the ship . Resistance was useless . They took down our
sails , cut our cable , towed the ship to land , and made us all go on
shore . We went towards the interior of the island and discovered a large
building . It was a lofty palace , having a gate of ebony , which we pushed
open , and soon discovered a room in which were human bones and roasting
spits . Presently there appeared a hideous black man , who was as tall as
a palm tree . He had but one eye , his teeth were long and sharp , and his
nails like the talons of a bird . He took me up as I would a kitten , but
finding I was little better than skin and bone , put me down with
contempt . The captain , being the fattest of the party , was sacrificed
to his appetite . When the monster had finished his meal he stretched
himself upon a great stone bench in the portico , and fell asleep , 
snoring louder than thunder . In this manner he slept till morning . In
the morning he went out . I said to my companions : 

 " Do not waste time in useless sorrow; let us hurry to look for timber
to make rafts . " 


We found some timber on the seashore , and labored hard; but having no
tools , it was evening before we had finished; and while we were on the
point of pushing the raft off the beach , our hideous tyrant returned
and drove us to his palace , as if we had been a flock of sheep . We saw
another of our companions sacrificed , and the giant lay down to sleep as
before . Our desperate condition gave us courage; nine of us got up very
softly , and held the points of the roasting spits in the fire until we
made them red-hot; we then thrust them at once into the monster ' s eye . 
He uttered a frightful scream , and having tried in vain to find us , 
opened the ebony gate and left the palace . We did not stay long behind
him , but ran to the seashore , got our rafts ready , and waited for
daylight to embark . But at dawn we beheld our monstrous enemy , led by
two giants of equal size , and followed by many others . We jumped upon
our rafts , and pushed them from the shore , the tide helping us . The
giants seeing us likely to escape , tore great pieces of rock , and wading
in the water up to their waists , hurled them at us with all their might . 
They sank every one of the rafts but that on which I was; thus all my
companions , except two , were drowned . We rowed as fast as we could , and
got out of the reach of these monsters . We were at sea two days , but at
last found a pleasant island . After eating some fruit , we lay down to
sleep , but were soon awakened by the hissing of an enormous serpent . One
of my comrades was instantly devoured by this terrific creature . I
climbed up a tree as fast as I could , and reached the topmost branches;
my remaining companion was following me , but the dreadful reptile
entwined itself round the tree and caught him . The serpent then went
down and glided away . I waited until late the next day before I ventured
to descend . Evening again approached , and I gathered together a great
quantity of small wood , brambles , and thorns . Having made them into
fagots , I formed a circle round the tree , and fastened the uppermost to
the branches of the tree . I then climbed up to the highest branches . At
night the serpent came again , but could not reach the tree; and crawling
vainly round and round my little fortification until daylight , he went
away . The next day I spied a ship in full sail a long way off . With the
linen of my turban I made a signal , which was perceived . I was taken on
board the ship and there told my adventures . The captain was very kind
to me . He said that he had some bales of goods which had belonged to a
merchant who had unintentionally left him some time ago on an
uninhabited island . As this man was undoubtedly dead , he intended to
sell the goods for the benefit of his relatives , and I should have the
profit of selling them . I now recollected this was the captain with whom
I sailed on my second voyage . I soon convinced him that I was really
Sindbad , whom he supposed to have been lost . He was delighted at the
discovery , and eagerly acknowledged that the property was mine . I
continued my voyage , sold my goods to great advantage , and returned
to Bagdad . 
