Sancho gave ear to what he heard with no small grief of mind , seeing
that all hopes of his earldom vanished away like smoke , and the fair
Princess Micomicona was turned into Dorothea , whilst his master was
sound asleep , careless of all that happened . Dorothea could not
believe that the happiness she enjoyed was not a dream . Cardenio and
Lucinda were of a similar mind , and Don Fernando was truly thankful
that he was free from the dangerous path he had taken , which must have
ended in loss of all honour and credit . 

In a word , all were contented and happy . The curate , like a man of
sense , congratulated every one on his good fortune; but she that kept
greatest jubilee and joy was the hostess , because Cardenio and the
curate had promised to pay all the damages done by Don Quixote . 

Only Sancho , as has been said , was unhappy and sorrowful . And thus he
went with a melancholy face to his master , who was then just awaking , 
and said :  " Your worship , Sir Knight of the Rueful Countenance , may
well sleep on as long as you please , without troubling yourself to
kill any giant , or restore to the princess her kingdom , for all that
is done and finished already . " 

 " That I well believe , " replied Don Quixote ,  " for I have had the most
monstrous and terrible battle with that giant that ever I had all the
days of my life; and yet with one back stroke , swish , I tumbled his
head to the ground , and his blood gushed forth , so that streams of it
ran along the earth as if it had been water . " 

 " As if it had been red wine , your worship might have said , " replied
Sancho ,  " for I would have you know , if you do not know already , that
the dead giant is no other than a ruined wine-bag , and the blood
six-and-twenty gallons of red wine . " 

 " What sayest thou , madman ? " cried Don Quixote .  " Art thou in thy right
wits ? " 

 " Get up , sir , " said Sancho ,  " and you shall see yourself the fine piece
of work you have done , and what we have to pay . You shall behold the
queen turned into a private lady , called Dorothea , with many other
things that may well astonish you . " 

 " I should marvel at nothing , " replied Don Quixote ,  " for if thou
rememberest right , I told thee , the other time that we were here , how
all that happened here was done by enchantment , and it would be no
wonder if it were the same now . " 

 " I should believe it all , " replied Sancho ,  " if my tossing in the
blanket had been a thing of that sort . Only it was not so , but very
real and certain . And I saw the innkeeper , who is here to this day , 
hold one end of the blanket and toss me up to the sky with very good
grace and strength , and as much mirth as muscle . And where it comes to
knowing persons , I hold , though I may be a simpleton and a sinner , 
that there is no enchantment , but only bruising and bad luck . " 

 " Well , " cried Don Quixote ,  " time will show; but give me my clothes , 
for I would see these wonders that thou speakest of for myself . " 

Sancho gave him his clothes , and , whilst he was making him ready , the
curate told Don Fernando and the rest , of Don Quixote ' s mad pranks , 
and the plan he had used to get him away from the Brown Mountains , 
where he imagined he was exiled through the disdain of his lady . 

The curate told them further , that since the good fortune of the Lady
Dorothea prevented them carrying out their scheme , they must invent
some other way of taking him home to his village . 

Cardenio offered to continue the adventure , and let Luanda take
Dorothea ' s part . 

 " No , " cried Don Fernando .  " It shall not be so , for I will have
Dorothea herself carry out her plan , and if the good knight ' s home is
not far from here , I shall be very glad to help in his cure . " 

 " It is not more than two days ' journey , " said the curate . 

 " Even if it were more , " replied Don Fernando ,  " I should be happy to
make the journey in so good a cause . " 

At this moment Don Quixote sallied out , completely armed with
Mambrino ' s helmet , which had a great hole in it , on his head , his
shield on his arm , and leaning on his lance . His grotesque appearance
amazed Don Fernando and his companions very much , who wondered at his
gaunt face so withered and yellow , the strangeness of his arms , and
his grave manner of proceeding . 

All stood silent to see what he would do , whilst the knight , casting
his eyes on the beautiful Dorothea , with great gravity and calmness
spoke as follows :  " I am informed , beautiful lady , by this my squire , 
that your greatness has come to an end , and your condition is
destroyed . For , instead of being a queen and a mighty princess , you
are now become a private damsel . If this has been done by the special
order of that sage magician , the king your father , because he dreaded
that I could not give you all necessary help , I say that he does not
know half his art , and has never understood the histories of knightly
adventures . For if he had read them with the attention that I have , he
would have found how many knights of less fame than myself have ended
far more desperate adventures than this , for it is no great matter to
kill a giant , be he ever so proud . For in truth it is not so many
hours since I myself fought with one; but I will be silent , lest they
tell me I lie . Time , the detecter of all things , will disclose it when
we least expect . " 

 " Thou foughtest with two wine-bags , not with a giant , " cried the
innkeeper . 

Don Fernando told him to be silent and not to interrupt Don Quixote , 
who continued his speech thus :  " In fine , I say , high and disinherited
lady , do not trouble if your father has made this change in you , for
there is no peril so great on earth but my sword shall open a way
through it , and by overthrowing your enemies ' head to the ground I
shall set your crown on your own head within a few days . " 

Don Quixote said no more , but waited for the princess ' s answer . She
knowing Don Fernando ' s wish that she should continue to carry out
their plan , answered with a good grace and pleasant manner , saying : 
 " Whosoever informed you , valorous Knight of the Rueful Countenance , 
that I have altered and transformed my being , hath not told you the
truth , for I am the very same to-day as I was yesterday . True it is
that my fortunes have somewhat changed , and given me more than I hoped
for or could wish for , but for all that I have not ceased to be what I
was before , and I still hope to have the aid of your valorous and
invincible arm . Therefore , good my lord , restore to my father his
honour , and believe him to be both wise and sagacious , for by his
magic he has found me a remedy for all my misfortunes . For I believe
that had it not been for you , I should never have attained the
happiness I now enjoy , and that I speak the truth these good gentlemen
will bear witness . All that is now wanted is that to-morrow morning we
set out on our journey . As for the conclusion of the good success I
hourly expect , that I leave to the valour of your invincible arm . " 

Thus spoke the witty Dorothea , and Don Quixote , having heard her , 
turned to Sancho with an air of great indignation , and said :  " Now , I
say unto thee , Sancho , thou art the veriest little rascal in all
Spain . Tell me , thief and vagabond , didst thou not tell me that this
princess was turned into a damsel , and that she was called Dorothea ? 
And that the head that I slashed from a giant ' s shoulders , was a
wine-skin , with a thousand other follies , that threw me into the
greatest confusion I was ever in in my life ? I vow , " he continued , 
looking up to the heavens and crashing his teeth together ,  " I vow that
I am about to make such a havoc of thee , as shall beat some wit into
the pates of all the lying squires that shall hereafter ever serve
knights-errant in this world . 

 " I pray you have patience , good my lord , " answered Sancho ,  " for it may
well befall me to be deceived touching the change of the lady and
Princess Micomicona . But in what touches the giant ' s head , or at least
the cutting of the winebags , and that the blood was but red wine , I am
not deceived , I swear . For the bags lie wounded there at your own
bed-head , and the red wine hath made a lake in your room : and all this
you will know , when his honour the landlord asks you to pay the
damages . " 

 " I tell thee , Sancho , thou art a blockhead , " said Don Quixote .  " Pardon
me , we have had enough of it . " 

 " Enough , indeed , " said Don Fernando ,  " and let me entreat you to say no
more of it . Seeing my lady the princess says she will go away
to-morrow , as it is too late to depart to-day , let us agree to spend
this evening in pleasant discourse . " 

It was now time for supper , and they all sat down at a long table , for
there was not a square or round one in the whole house . And they gave
the principal end to Don Quixote , though he did all he could to refuse
it; but when he had taken it , he commanded that the Lady Micomicona
should sit at his elbow , as he was her champion . The others being
placed in due order , they all enjoyed a pleasant supper , listening to
the wise , strange discourse that Don Quixote held upon his favourite
subject of knightly adventures . 




THE LAST OF THE NOTABLE ADVENTURES OF OUR GOOD KNIGHT

Retold by Judge Parry


Don Quixote , as soon as he found himself free from all the quarrels by
which he had been surrounded , held it high time to begin his voyage
and bring to an end the great adventure unto which he was called and
chosen . 

Therefore , having made up his mind to depart , he went and cast himself
upon his knees before Dorothea and said :  " I cannot but think , high and
worthy lady , that our abode in this castle is nothing profitable , and
may turn out to our disadvantage . For who knows but that your enemy
the giant hath learned by spies or other secret means how I intend to
come and destroy him , and he may by now have fortified himself in some
impregnable castle or fortress , against the strength of which even the
force of mine invincible arm will be of little use . Therefore , dear
lady , let us by our diligence hinder his plans , and let us depart to
the place where fortune calls us . " 

Don Quixote said no more but awaited the answer of the beautiful
princess , who , with a lordly air and in a style not unworthy of Don
Quixote himself , replied as follows : 

 " I thank you , sir knight , for the desire you show to assist me in this
my great need , and I trust your desires and mine may succeed , that I
may show you that there are some thankful women on earth . As for my
departure , let it be as you wish . " * * *

Two days passed , when it seemed to all the noble company at the inn
that it was time to depart , and they considered how , without putting
Dorothea and Don Fernando to the pain of turning back with Don Quixote
to his village , the curate and the barber could carry him home as they
desired , and leave him cured of his folly in his own home . 

This was the plan they decided on . They made a bargain with a wagoner , 
who chanced to pass by that way with a team of oxen , to carry him in
the following manner : --

They made a thing like a cage of timber , so big that Don Quixote might
sit or lie in it at his ease , and presently Don Fernando , Cardemo , 
their companions , and the innkeeper did all , by master curate ' s
directions , cover their faces and disguise themselves as well as they
could , so that they might seem to Don Quixote to be different persons
to any he had seen in the castle . This being done , they entered
silently into the place where he slept , reposing after his recent
battles . They went up to him as he was sleeping peacefully , not
fearing any such accident , and , laying hold of him forcibly , they tied
his hands and feet very strongly , so that when he started out of his
sleep he could not move , nor do anything else but stare and wonder at
the strange faces that he saw before him . 

And immediately he fell into the idea , which his wild imagination had
at once suggested to him , that all these strange figures were spirits
and phantoms of that enchanted castle , and he believed that he himself
was without doubt enchanted , seeing that he could neither move nor
defend himself . 

All happened as the curate who plotted the jest expected; and after
they had brought him to the cage , they shut him within , and afterwards
nailed the bars thereof so well that they could not easily be broken . 

Sancho all this time looked on in wonder to see what would happen to
his master . 

Then the phantoms mounted him upon their shoulders , and as he was
carried out of his chamber door the barber called out in as terrible a
voice as he could muster :  " O Knight of the Rueful Countenance , be not
grieved at thine imprisonment , for so it must be that thine adventures
be more speedily ended . And thou , O most noble and obedient squire
that ever had sword at girdle , beard on a face , or dent in a nose , let
it not dismay thee to see carried away thus the flower of all
knighthood . For I assure thee that all thy wages shall be paid to
thee , if thou wilt follow in the steps of this valorous and enchanted
knight . And as I am not allowed to say more , farewell ! " 

Don Quixote listened attentively to all this prophecy , and said :  " O
thou , whatsoever thou beest , I desire thee to request in my name that
I may not perish in this prison before my work is ended . And as
concerns my squire Sancho Panza , I trust in his goodness that he will
not abandon me in good or bad fortune . For , though it should fall out
through his or my hard lot that I shall not be able to bestow on him
an island , as I have promised , his wages cannot be lost to him , for in
my will , which is made already , I have set down what he is to have for
his many good services . " 

Sancho Panza bowed his head with great reverence when he heard this , 
and kissed both his master ' s hands , which were bound tightly together . 
Then the phantoms lifted up the cage and hoisted it on to the wagon
that was drawn by the team of oxen . 

After bidding farewell to all their friends , the procession
started . First went the cart guided by the carter , then the troopers , 
then followed Sancho upon his ass leading Rozinante by the bridle , and
last of all the curate and the barber , riding their mighty mules , with
masks on their faces . 

Don Quixote sat with his hands tied and his legs stretched out , 
leaning against a bar of the cage , with such a silence and such
patience that he seemed rather to be a statue than a man . And thus at
an alderman-like pace , such as suited the slow steps of the heavy
oxen , they journeyed home . 

At the end of two days they arrived at Don Quixote ' s village , into
which they entered about noon . This was on a Sunday , when all the
people were in the market-place , through the midst of which Don
Quixote ' s cart passed . All drew near to see what was in it , and when
they knew their neighbour they were greatly astounded . A little boy
ran home before , to tell the old woman and the niece that their lord
and uncle was returned . It would have moved one to pity to have heard
the cries and lamentations the two good women made , and the curses
they poured out against all books of knighthood , when they saw Don
Quixote enter the gates of his own house again in so strange a
carriage . 

Sancho Panza ' s wife , when she heard of his return , ran forward to meet
her husband , and the first question she asked was whether the ass were
in health or no . 

Sancho answered that he was come in better health than his master . 

 " Tell me , then , " cried his wife ,  " what profit hast thou reaped by this
squireship ? What petticoat hast thou brought me home ? What shoes for
the little boys ? " 

 " I bring none of these things , good wife , " replied Sancho ,  " though I
bring things better thought of and of greater moment . " 

 " I am glad of that , " said his wife ,  " for I should like to see them , to
the end that my heart may be cheered , which hath been swollen and
sorrowful for so long , all the time of thine absence . " 

 " Thou shalt see them at home , " said Sancho ,  " therefore rest
satisfied . For when we travel once again to seek adventures , thou
shalt see me shortly afterwards an earl or governor of an island , one
of the best in the world . " 

 " I pray that it may be so , " replied his wife;  " but what means that
island , for I understand not the word ? " 

 " Honey is not made for the ass ' s mouth , " said Sancho ,  " but thou shalt
know all in good time . Do not busy thyself , Joan , to know all things
in a sudden . It is enough that I will tell thee all the truth , and
therefore close thy mouth . I will only say this much unto thee as yet , 
that there is nothing in the world so pleasant as for an honest man to
be the squire of a knight that seeks adventures . " 

Now , if I were to tell you that Don Quixote got quite well and lived
quietly at home after all these adventures , and never went abroad
again , I should tell you what is not true . For some day , and I hope at
no great distance of time , you may read all that the great Cervantes
has written , not only of the adventures of which I have told you the
story , but of others . You will then learn how Sancho Panza became at
last governor of an island for a short space , and may read of the
great wisdom and shrewdness with which he ruled . 
﻿

 THE QUEEN OF LANTERN LAND


Once upon a time the youngest son of a king became filled with the
desire to go abroad and see the world . He got his father ' s permission to
depart , kissed his parents good-bye , mounted his black horse , and
galloped away down the high road . Soon the gray towers of the old castle
in which he was born hid themselves behind him . 

The Prince journeyed on , spending the days in traveling , and the nights
in little wayside inns , till one day he found himself in the heart of
the Adamant Mountains . The great , red granite crags of the surrounding
peaks rose out of the gleaming snow like ugly fingers , and the slopes of
giant glaciers sparkled in the sun like torrents of diamonds . The Prince
sat down by some stunted trees whose tops had long before been broken
off by an avalanche , and began to eat the bit of bread and cheese which
he had stored in his pocket . His black horse , meanwhile , ate the grass
which grew here and there along the mountain path . And as the Prince sat
there in the bright sun and the silence of the mountains , he became
aware of a low , continuous roaring . 

 " There must be a waterfall near-by , " said the Prince to himself .  " I ' ll
go and see it . " 

So , casting another look at his steed , who was contentedly browsing , the
Prince climbed up the mountainside in the direction of the sound . 

The Prince climbed and climbed , he went in this direction and in that , 
yet the sound never grew any louder or fainter . Suddenly he realized
that he was hopelessly lost . The little path up which he had ridden had
vanished completely , and he had not the slightest idea in which
direction it lay . He called aloud , but only the mountain echoes answered
mockingly . 

Night came , and the Prince took shelter behind a great rock . All the
next day he labored to find the path , but in vain . He grew very hungry
and cold . Every once in a while he would hear the roaring of the
waterfall , which seemed to have grown louder . 

Another day dawned , and another day again . The Prince was getting very
weak . He knew that he was approaching the mysterious cataract , for the
noise of the water was now tremendous , and heaven and earth were full of
its roar . The third night came , and the full moon rose solemnly over the
snow-clad summits of the lonely and mysterious mountains . Suddenly the
Prince , walking blindly on , staggered through a narrow passage-way
between two splintered crags , and found himself face to face with the
mystery . 

He stood on the snowy floor of a vast amphitheatre whose walls were the
steep sides of the giant mountains . Farthest away from him , and opposite
the moon , the wall of the bowl appeared as a giant black precipice , 
whose top seemed to reach almost to the moon-dimmed stars; and over this
precipice a broad river was endlessly pouring , shining in the night like
the overflow of an ocean of molten silver . Though now very weak from
lack of food , and dizzy with the roaring of the cataract , the Prince
made his way to the shore of the foaming and eddying lake into which the
water was falling . Great was his surprise to discover that the overflow
of this lake disappeared into the earth through a long , low opening in
the cliff behind the fall . Greater still was his surprise to see a
strange many-colored light burning within the cave . 

The Prince made his way toward the light , along a narrow beach of white
sand lying between the wall of the cavern and the racing waters of the
mysterious river , and found that the glow came from a magnificent
lantern studded with emeralds , topazes , amethysts , and rubies , which
hung by a chain from the roof of the grotto . Directly under this
lantern , drawn up on the sand , lay a little boat with a lantern fastened
to the bow . The Prince pushed the boat into the river , and got into it , 
and the swift current seized him and hurried him away . 

At first the cavern grew higher and wider; then it shrank again , and the
boat , borne along with incredible speed , shot down a rocky passageway
into the very heart of the earth . The passageway broadened once more , 
and the boat rode gently through monstrous caves whose roofs were upheld
by twisted columns taller than the tallest tree . There were times when
all was so still that the Prince could easily have imagined himself back
in the solitude of the mountains; there were times when the foaming and
roaring of the underground river grew so deafening that the Prince
feared lest he might be approaching the brink of a subterranean
cataract . 

Many hours passed . The Prince did not know whether it was night or day . 
At length , while the boat was gliding through a vast hall , he fell
asleep . When he awoke , he found that the boat was floating on the black , 
glassy surface of an immense underground ocean . All signs of the cavern
had disappeared . Far away , over the edge of this ocean , a strange , 
beautiful glow mounted into the starless sky of the underworld . And
while the Prince was gazing at the glow , the boat swung into a new
current , and was borne swiftly toward the light . In a short time the
light grew so wide and bright that one would have believed that a
strange , golden sun had risen . The boat passed between two giant marble
pillars supporting enormous crystal globes filled with a golden fire , 
and the Prince found himself in the harbor of Lantern Land . 

A city lay before him , a strange golden city edging the shore of a vast , 
semi-circular bay . Because in the centre of the earth there is neither
sun nor moon , the people have to be continually burning lights; and so
many and so great were the lanterns of Lantern Land that the town was as
bright as day . The edge of the harbor was marked with a row of golden
lanterns; there were immense lanterns at every six paces along the
streets; a lantern hung from every house; and the church-towers , instead
of having bells in them , had great golden lamps which illumined
everything for some distance about . Moreover , every inhabitant of
Lantern Land carried a lantern with him wherever he went , the rich
carrying golden lanterns set with transparent precious stones , the poor
carrying lights of ordinary glass . 

Soon the Prince saw a magnificent ship coming out to meet him . The prow
was carved in the shape of a dragon ' s head , and a beautiful lantern hung
from its jaws . Overcome by hunger and fatigue , the poor Prince fell
insensible to the floor of his little boat . When he came to his senses
again , he was lying between sheets of the whitest , most delicate linen
in a great four-poster bed , in a room in the royal palace . 

Thanks to his kind hosts , the Prince soon recovered his strength . When
he was completely himself again , he was summoned to an audience with the
Queen of Lantern Land . 

The Queen , a very beautiful young woman , wearing a wonderful lantern
crown , sat on an ebony throne . On each side of the throne stood a tall
soldier , clad in scarlet and holding a long ebony staff surmounted by a
round lantern lit by a golden flame . 

The Prince dropped on his knee , and thanked the Queen for her kindness
and hospitality . 

 " You are the first stranger to come to Lantern Land for a thousand
years , " said the young Queen .  " If it is not asking too much from a
guest , pray how did you happen to find the river of the underworld ? " 

So the Prince told her that he was a king ' s son , and described his
adventures in the mountains . You may be sure the Queen was glad to hear
of his royal birth , for she had fallen in love with him at first sight . 

A month passed . The Prince remained a guest in the palace . All kinds of
festivities were given in his honor; there were wonderful dances , 
masquerades , picnics , and theatricals going on all the time . One day the
Prince and the Queen , accompanied by a little group of courtiers , rode
to the frontier of Lantern Land . The lovers galloped ahead of the party
and reached a little hill beyond which there were no more lanterns . 
Ahead of them the rolling land , sweeping farther and farther away from
the light , grew darker and darker , till it finally plunged into the
eternal night of the underworld . 

The Prince looked at the Queen , and saw that she was weeping . 

 " Dear love , why do you weep ? " asked the Prince , who felt sad to see
tears in his lady ' s lovely eyes . 

 " I weep to think that in spite of our love we must soon part forever , " 
said the Queen . 

 " Part forever ? Dear lady , what can you mean ? " said the anxious Prince . 

 " A cruel fate hangs over us , " replied the lady .  " Know , dear Prince , that
I am promised in marriage to the Enchanter Dragondel , and that in
exactly eight days , he will come here to claim my hand . " 

 " The Enchanter Dragondel--who is he ? " said the Prince . 

 " Alas , " said the Queen ,  " the Enchanter Dragondel is the most powerful
magician of all the underworld . He is about eight feet tall , has cruel
sunken eyes that burn like dull fires , and dresses entirely in black . We
met at a ball given by the King of the Goblins . Dragondel pursued me
with compliments . A few days afterwards , an iron boat arrived in the
port of Lantern Land , having on board a giant blue dog who is
Dragondel ' s younger brother . This terrible animal , from whose sight the
people of Lantern Land fled screaming , made his way to the palace , and
dropped at my feet a jeweled casket , which he carried between his jaws . 
The casket contained Dragondel ' s request for my hand , and added that , 
were I to refuse him , he would let loose a legion of ghosts and other
winged spirits against the lanterns of Lantern Land . I had a vision of
Lantern Land in darkness; of my poor subjects dying of fear and
starvation . Rather than let this vision come true , I accepted the
Enchanter . Soon I shall never see you again , for Dragondel will come and
take me to his awful castle which lies on an island in the dark ocean . 
Nor will you ever be able to save me , for Dragondel has so bewitched the
waves that a terrible whirlpool forms on the sea when a boat approaches
the enchanted castle , and engulfs it . " 

 " But I can fight Dragondel , " said the Prince , like the brave youth that
he was . 

 " That would be of little use , " replied the Queen ,  " for you would be
changed into a stone the instant you crossed swords with him . Tomorrow , 
the blue dog arrives to remind me of my obligation , and to carry back to
the island some of the palace servants who are to make Dragondel ' s
castle ready for my coming . " 

The other members of the party now rode up , and the Queen dabbed her
eyes with her handkerchief , and pretended not to have been crying . The
Prince and the Queen felt very unhappy as they rode home . 

On the next day , sure enough , the iron boat arrived , and the blue dog , 
who was as large as a lion , went to the Queen ' s palace , and bade her
make ready for the coming wedding . A dozen of the Queen ' s servants were
then ordered to go with the blue dog to Dragondel ' s castle . Among these
servants , disguised as a kitchen lad , was the Prince; for he had
determined to see if there was not some way in which the young Queen
could be rescued from the wicked magician . 

The boat neared the island , but no terrible whirlpool formed in the
enchanted sea . At last the boat reached Dragondel ' s castle . It stood on
the top of a high lonely rock against whose steep sides the waves of the
underground ocean were forever foaming and breaking , and it was half in
ruins and was very poorly lighted . 

The Prince took his place in the kitchen , and sought for an opportunity
to prevent the marriage of Dragondel and the Queen . 

For four days of the precious week , however , the poor Prince was kept so
busy baking and making pastries for the coming of the bride that he did
not have an instant to ask questions or do anything else . 

In the morning hours of the fifth day there was a terrible moaning and
roaring outside , and the cooks rushed to the kitchen windows . An unhappy
fishing boat had been swept by the wind too near Dragondel ' s castle , the
enchanted whirlpool had formed , and caught the boat in its awful circle . 
Now it went slowly round the outer edge , now , going faster and faster , 
it slid down the side of the awful funnel , and finally it vanished . An
instant later , the whirlpool had disappeared , leaving the sea roaring
and foaming . 

The Prince shuddered . 

 " Well you may shudder , " said the chief cook ,  " for such would have been
your fate if our master ' s brother had not carried with him the talisman
which rules the whirlpool . " 

 " Talisman ? What talisman ? " said the Prince affecting stupidity . 

 " Why the little golden hand , you fool , " said the chief cook . 

 " My ! it must be a great big hand to be able to quiet that whirlpool , " 
said the Prince . 

 " Big indeed , you ninny ! " growled the cook .  " Why , the magic hand is only
as big as a baby ' s hand . I ' ve seen it many times . The master carries it
in his pocket , and puts it under his pillow while he sleeps . " 

So , later on , when his work was done , and everybody had gone to bed , the
Prince , in the hope of stealing the talisman , tried to make his way to
Dragondel ' s bedchamber . But when he reached the foot of the stairs which
led to the Enchanter ' s room , he found it guarded by two black panthers
which stared at him with insolent yellow eyes and switched their long
tails . The Prince went outdoors , to see if there was any hope of
climbing to the room along the outer wall , and found that the windows of
Dragondel ' s chamber overlooked a cliff falling thousands of feet sheer
to the dark sea . Far , far away , the Prince saw the glow of Lantern Land . 
Only a short time remained to him in which to save his beloved lady of
the lanterns . 

As he wandered about , very sick at heart , he saw a little black cat
running madly back and forth along the edge of a steep cliff from one of
whose crevices came a persistent , unhappy mewing . The poor cat was a
mother-cat , and was trying to rescue a kitten of hers that had fallen
down between the rocks . At great risk of being dashed to pieces himself , 
the brave Prince climbed down the precipice , rescued the kitten , and
gave it back to its anxious mother . 

 " Thank you , brave youth , " said the old cat . 

 " May it some day be within my power to help you as you have helped me . " 

 " You can help me this very moment , " said the Prince . And he told the cat
who he was , why he had come to the castle , and of his desire to get
possession of the talisman . 

 " I will help you get the talisman , " said the cat .  " The panthers will let
me pass , for they are cousins of mine . But you must make another little
golden hand to take the place of the one I shall steal; for if Dragondel
misses the golden hand , he will summon his demons to find it , and we
shall both lose our lives . Go now to the kitchen , carve a small hand
with the fingers close together and the thumb lying close to the
fingers , gild it over with the gold dust you have had given you for the
pastry icings , and bring it to me tomorrow night at this very hour . " 

So the Prince worked the rest of the night carving and gilding the
little golden hand , and on the next night he gave it to the cat . The cat
took it in her mouth as she would have a mouse , walked coolly by the
panthers , and entered Dragondel ' s room . She had just succeeded in
getting the true hand out from under the magician ' s pillow when
Dragondel woke up . The cat was clever enough to pretend to be engaged in
a mouse-hunt , so the Enchanter paid no attention to her and fell asleep
once more . When the cat , however , got under Dragondel ' s couch again , the
two hands lay side by side and she could not remember just which one was
the talisman and which one the false hand . So because she had to act
quickly , she put one of the hands under the pillow , brought the other to
the Prince and told him her story . But so well matched were the little
hands , that even the Prince was far from certain that he had not got his
own hand back again . 

And now came the seventh day , the day on which Dragondel , the blue dog , 
and all the wicked Enchanter ' s friends were to sail to Lantern Land for
the marriage ceremony . The iron ship , made gay with a thousand small
scarlet lanterns , stood ready to carry them over . The Enchanter and his
company got in , and the vessel left the island . 

The Prince stood watching the ship from the top of the cliffs . What
anxiety was in his heart ! If Dragondel still possessed the true
talisman , he would cross the whirlpool safely , and marry the beautiful
Queen of Lantern Land . 

The vessel sped on . It was now at some distance from the island . 

 " All is lost , " thought the Prince with a sinking heart;  " Dragondel has
the true talisman . " And in his bitterness he was about to throw the
little golden hand which lay in his pocket down into the sea . 

Suddenly the air became filled with a terrible moaning; the sea became
troubled; the whirlpool awoke . And the Prince saw the red lights of the
Enchanter ' s ship whirled round and round , faster and faster , till they
disappeared forever in the waters of the sunless sea . 

As for the Prince , he soon found another boat , and taking with him the
talisman , his fellow servants , and the black cat and her kittens , he
returned to Lantern Land , married the Queen , and lived happily ever
after . 

