In the reign of the same caliph , Haroun-al-Raschid , of whom we
have already heard , there lived at Bagdad a poor porter called
Hindbad . One day , when the weather was excessively hot , he was
employed to carry a heavy burden from one end of the town to the
other . Being much fatigued , he took off his load , and sat upon it , 
near a large mansion . 

He was much pleased that he stopped at this place; for the
agreeable smell of wood of aloes and of pastils that came from the
house , mixing with the scent of the rose-water , completely
perfumed and embalmed the air . Besides , he heard from within a
concert of instrumental music , accompanied with the harmonious
notes of nightingales and other birds . This charming melody , and
the smell of several sorts of savory dishes , made the porter
conclude there was a feast with great rejoicings within . He went
to some of the servants , whom he saw standing at the gate in
magnificent apparel , and asked the name of the proprietor .  " How , " 
replied one of them ,  " do you live in Bagdad , and know not that
this is the house of Sindbad the Sailor , that famous voyager who
has sailed round the world ? " The porter lifted up his eyes to
heaven , and said , loud enough to be heard ,  " Almighty Creator of
all things , consider the difference between Sindbad and me ! I am
every day exposed to fatigues and calamities , and can scarcely get
coarse barley-bread for myself and my family , while happy Sindbad
expends immense riches , and leads a life of continual pleasure . 
What has he done to obtain from Thee a lot so agreeable ? And what
have I done to deserve one so wretched ? " 

While the porter was thus indulging his melancholy , a servant came
out of the house , and taking him by the arm , bade him follow him , 
for Sindbad , his master , wanted to speak to him . The servants
brought him into a great hall , where a number of people sat round
a table , covered with all sorts of savory dishes . At the upper end
sat a comely , venerable gentleman , with a long white beard , and
behind him stood a number of officers and domestics , all ready to
attend his pleasure . This person was Sindbad . Hindbad , whose fear
was increased at the sight of so many people , and of a banquet so
sumptuous , saluted the company trembling . Sindbad bade him draw
near , and seating him at his right hand , served him himself , and
gave him excellent wine , of which there was abundance upon the
sideboard . 

Now , Sindbad had heard the porter complain through the window , and
this it was that induced him to have him brought in . When the
repast was over , Sindbad addressed his conversation to Hindbad , 
and inquired his name and employment , and said :  " I wish to hear
from your own mouth what it was you lately said in the street . " 

At this request Hindbad hung down his head in confusion , and
replied :  " My lord , I confess that my fatigue put me out of humor , 
and occasioned me to utter some indiscreet words , which I beg you
to pardon . "  " Do not think I am so unjust , " resumed Sindbad ,  " as to
resent such a complaint . But I must correct your error concerning
myself . You think , no doubt , that I have acquired without labor
and trouble the ease and indulgence which I now enjoy . But do not
mistake; I did not attain to this happy condition without enduring
for several years more trouble of body and mind than can well be
imagined . Yes , gentlemen , " he added , speaking to the whole
company ,  " I assure you that my sufferings have been of a nature so
extraordinary as would deprive the greatest miser of his love of
riches; and as an opportunity now offers , I will , with your leave , 
relate the dangers I have encountered , which I think will not be
uninteresting to you . " 


