There was once a king who had three sons , all handsome , brave and
noble of heart . Nevertheless , some wicked courtiers made their father
believe they were eager to wear his crown , which , though he was old , 
he had no mind to resign . He therefore invented a plan to get them out
of the kingdom , and prevent their carrying out any undutiful projects . 
Sending for them to a private audience , he conversed with them kindly , 
and said :  " You must be sensible , my dear children , that my great age
prevents me from attending so closely as I have hitherto done to state
affairs . I fear this may be injurious to my subjects; I therefore
desire to place my crown on the head of one of you; but it is no more
than just that , in return for such a present , you should procure me
some amusement in my retirement , before I leave the capital for ever . 
I cannot help thinking that a little dog , handsome , faithful , and
engaging , would be the very thing to make me happy; so that , without
bestowing a preference on either of you , I declare that he who brings
me the most perfect little dog shall be my successor . " 

The princes were much surprised at the fancy of their father to have a
little dog , yet they accepted the proposition with pleasure; and
accordingly , after taking leave of the king , who presented them with
abundance of money and jewels , and appointed that day twelvemonth for
their return , they set off on their travels . 

Before separating , however , they took some refreshment together , in an
old palace about three miles out of town , where they mutually agreed
to meet in the same place on that day twelvemonth , and go all together
with their presents to court . They also agreed to change their names , 
and travel incognito . 

Each took a different road; but it is intended to relate the
adventures of only the youngest , who was the most beautiful , amiable , 
and accomplished prince in the world . As he travelled from town to
town , he bought all the handsome dogs that fell in his way; and as
soon as he saw one that was handsomer than those he had , he made a
present of the rest; for twenty servants would scarcely have been
sufficient to take care of all the dogs he was continually purchasing . 
At length , wandering he knew not whither , he found himself in a
forest; night suddenly came on , and with it a violent storm of
thunder , lightning , and rain : to add to his perplexity , he lost his
way . After he had groped about for a long time , he perceived a light , 
which made him suppose that he was not far from some house : he
accordingly pursued his way towards it , and in a short time found
himself at the gates of the most magnificent palace he had ever
beheld . The entrance-door was of gold , covered with sapphires , which
shone so that scarcely could the strongest eyesight bear to look at
it : this was the light the prince had seen from the forest . The walls
were of transparent porcelain , variously coloured , and represented the
history of all the fairies that had existed from the beginning of the
world . The prince , coming back to the golden door , observed a deer ' s
foot fastened to a chain of diamonds; he could not help wondering at
the magnificence he beheld , and the security in which the inhabitants
seemed to live;  " For , " said he to himself ,  " nothing could be easier
than for thieves to steal this chain , and as many of the
sapphire-stones as would make their fortunes . " He pulled the chain , 
and heard a bell , the sound of which was exquisite . In a few moments
the door was opened; yet he perceived nothing but twelve hands in the
air , each holding a torch . The prince was so astonished that he durst
not move a step--when he felt himself gently pushed on by some other
hands from behind him . He walked on , in great perplexity , till he
entered a vestibule inlaid with porphyry and lapis-stone , where the
most melodious voice he had ever heard chanted the following words : --

  " Welcome , prince , no danger fear , 
 Mirth and love attend you here;
 You shall break the magic spell , 
 That on a beauteous lady fell . 

 Welcome , prince , no danger fear , 
 Mirth and love attend you here . " 

The prince now advanced with confidence , wondering what these words
could mean; the hands moved him forward towards a large door of
coral , which opened of itself to give him admittance into a splendid
apartment built of mother-o ' -pearl , through which he passed into
others , so richly adorned with paintings and jewels , and so
resplendently lighted with thousands of lamps , girandoles , and
lustres , that he imagined he must be in an enchanted palace . When he
had passed through sixty apartments , all equally splendid , he was
stopped by the hands , and a large easy chair advanced of itself
towards the fireplace; then the hands , which he observed were
extremely white and delicate , took off his wet clothes , and supplied
their place with the finest linen imaginable , adding a comfortable
wrapping-gown , embroidered with gold and pearls . 

The hands next brought him an elegant dressing-table , and combed his
hair so very gently that he scarcely felt their touch . They held
before him a beautiful basin , filled with perfumes , for him to wash
his face and hands , and afterwards took off the wrapping-gown , and
dressed him in a suit of clothes of still greater splendour . When his
toilet was complete , they conducted him to an apartment he had not yet
seen , and which also was magnificently furnished . There was a table
spread for supper , and everything upon it was of the purest gold , 
adorned with jewels . The prince observed there were two covers set , 
and was wondering who was to be his companion , when his attention was
suddenly caught by a small figure not a foot high , which just then
entered the room , and advanced towards him . It had on a long black
veil , and was supported by two cats dressed in mourning and with
swords by their sides : they were followed by a numerous retinue of
cats , some carrying cages full of rats , and others mouse-traps full of
mice . 

The prince was at a loss what to think . The little figure now
approached , and throwing aside her veil , he beheld a most beautiful
white cat : she seemed young and melancholy; and , addressing herself to
him , she said ,  " My prince , you are welcome; your presence affords me
the greatest pleasure . " 

 " Madam , " replied he ,  " I would fain thank you for your generosity , nor
can I help observing that you must be an extraordinary creature to
possess , with your present form , the gift of speech , and the most
magnificent palace I have ever seen . " 

 " All this is very true , " answered the beautiful cat;  " but , prince , I
am not fond of talking , and least of all do I like compliments; let us
therefore sit down to supper . " 

The trunkless hands then placed the dishes on the table , and the
prince and white cat seated themselves at it . The first dish was a pie
made of young pigeons , and the next was a fricassee of the fattest
mice . The view of the one made the prince almost afraid to taste the
other , till the white cat , who guessed his thoughts , assured him that
there were certain dishes at table which had been dressed on purpose
for him , in which there was not a morsel of either rat or mouse : 
accordingly , he ate heartily of such as she recommended . When supper
was over , he perceived that the white cat had a portrait set in gold
hanging to one of her feet . He begged her permission to look at it;
when , to his astonishment , he saw the portrait of a handsome young
man , who exactly resembled himself ! He thought there was something
most extraordinary in all this : yet , as the white cat sighed and
looked very sorrowful , he did not venture to ask any questions . He
conversed with her on different subjects , and found her extremely well
versed in everything that was passing in the world . When night was far
advanced , his hostess wished him a good night , and he was conducted by
the hands to his bedchamber , which was different still from anything
he had seen in the palace , being hung with the wings of butterflies
mixed with the most curious feathers . His bed was of gauze , festooned
with bunches of the gayest ribands , and the looking-glasses reached
from the floor to the ceiling . The prince was undressed and put into
bed by the hands , without speaking a word . He , however , slept little , 
and in the morning was awakened by a confused noise . The hands took
him out of bed , and put on him a handsome hunting-jacket . He looked
into the courtyard , and perceived more than five hundred cats , busily
employed in preparing for the field--for this was a day of festival . 
Presently the white cat came to his apartment; and having politely
inquired after his health , she invited him to partake of their
amusement . The prince willingly acceded , and mounted a wooden horse , 
richly caparisoned , which had been prepared for him , and which he was
assured would gallop to admiration . The beautiful white cat mounted a
monkey; she wore a dragoon ' s cap , which made her look so fierce that
all the rats and mice ran away in the utmost terror . 

Everything being ready , the horns sounded , and away they went : no
hunting was ever more agreeable . The cats ran faster than the hares
and rabbits; and when they caught any , they turned them out to be
hunted in the presence of the white cat , and a thousand cunning tricks
were played . Nor were the birds in safety; for the monkey made nothing
of climbing up the trees , with the white cat on his back , to the nests
of the young eagles . When the chase was over , the whole retinue
returned to the palace; the white cat immediately exchanged her
dragoon ' s cap for the veil , and sat down to supper with the prince , 
who , being very hungry , ate heartily , and afterwards partook with her
of the most delicious wines . He then was conducted to his chamber as
before , and wakened in the morning to renew the same sort of life , 
which day after day became so pleasant to him that he no longer
thought of anything but of pleasing the sweet little creature who
received him so courteously : accordingly , every day was spent in new
amusements . The prince had almost forgotten his country and relations , 
and sometimes even regretted that he was not a cat , so great was his
affection for his mewing companions . 

 " Alas ! " said he to the white cat ,  " how will it afflict me to leave
you , whom I love so much ! Either make yourself a lady , or make me a
cat . " She smiled at the prince ' s wish , but offered no reply . 

At length , the twelvemonth was nearly expired : the white cat , who knew
the very day when the prince was to reach his father ' s palace , 
reminded him that he had but three days longer to look for a perfect
little dog . The prince , astonished at his own forgetfulness , began to
afflict himself; when the cat told him not to be so sorrowful , since
she would not only provide him with a little dog , but also with a
wooden horse , which should convey him safely home in less than twelve
hours . 

 " Look here , " said she , showing him an acorn ,  " this contains what you
desire . " 

The prince put the acorn to his ear , and heard the barking of a little
dog . Transported with joy , he thanked the cat a thousand times; and
the next day , bidding her tenderly adieu , he set out on his return . 

The prince arrived first at the place of rendezvous , and was soon
joined by his brothers : they mutually embraced , and began to give an
account of their success; when the youngest showed them only a little
mongrel cur , telling them that he thought it could not fail to please
the king , from its extraordinary beauty . The brothers trod on each
other ' s toes under the table , as much as to say ,  " We have little to
fear from this sorry-looking animal . " The next day they went together
to the palace . The dogs of the two elder brothers were lying on
cushions , and so curiously wrapped around with embroidered quilts , 
that one would scarcely venture to touch them . The youngest produced
his cur , and all wondered how the prince could hope to receive a crown
for such a shabby present . The king examined the two little dogs of
the elder princes , and declared he thought them so equally beautiful
that he knew not to which , with justice , he could give the preference . 
They accordingly began to dispute; when the youngest prince , taking
his acorn from his pocket , soon ended their contention; for a little
dog appeared , which could with ease go through the smallest ring , and
was besides a miracle of beauty . The king could not possibly hesitate
in declaring his satisfaction; yet , as he was not more inclined than
the year before to part with his crown , he told his sons that he was
extremely obliged to them for the pains they had taken : and since they
had succeeded so well , he wished they would make a second attempt; he
therefore begged they would take another year in order to procure a
piece of cambric , fine enough to be drawn through the eye of a small
needle . 

The three princes thought this very hard; yet they set out , in
obedience to the king ' s command . The two eldest took different roads , 
and the youngest remounted his wooden horse , and in a short time
arrived at the palace of his beloved white cat , who received him with
the greatest joy , while the trunkless hands helped him to dismount , 
and provided him with immediate refreshment . Afterwards the prince
gave the white cat an account of the admiration which had been
bestowed on the beautiful little dog , and informed her of the further
injunction of his father . 

 " Make yourself perfectly easy , dear prince , " said she;  " I have in my
palace some cats who are perfect adepts in making such cambric as the
king requires; so you have nothing to do but to give me the pleasure
of your company while it is making , and I will procure you all the
amusement possible . " 

She accordingly ordered the most curious fire-works to be played off
in sight of the window of the apartment in which they were sitting;
and nothing but festivity and rejoicing was heard throughout the
palace for the prince ' s return . As the white cat frequently gave
proofs of an excellent understanding , the prince was by no means tired
of her company; she talked with him of state affairs , of theatres , of
fashions : in short , she was at a loss on no subject whatever; so that
when the prince was alone , he had plenty of amusement in thinking how
it could possibly be , that a small white cat could be endowed with all
the attractions of the very best and most charming of women . 

The twelvemonth in this manner again passed insensibly away; but the
cat took care to remind the prince of his duty in proper time .  " For
once , my prince , " said she ,  " I will have the pleasure of equipping you
as suits your high rank . " And , looking into the courtyard , he saw a
superb car , ornamented all over with gold , silver , pearls , and
diamonds , drawn by twelve horses as white as snow , and harnessed in
the most sumptuous trappings; and behind the car a thousand guards , 
richly apparelled , were waiting to attend on the prince ' s person . She
then presented him with a nut :  " You will find in it , " said she ,  " the
piece of cambric I promised you : do not break the shell till you are
in the presence of the king your father . " Then , to prevent the
acknowledgments which the prince was about to offer , she hastily bade
him adieu . 

Nothing could exceed the speed with which the snow-white horses
conveyed this fortunate prince to his father ' s palace , where his
brothers had just arrived before him . They embraced each other , and
demanded an immediate audience of the king , who received them with the
greatest of kindness . The princes hastened to place at the feet of his
majesty the curious present he had required them to procure . The
eldest produced a piece of cambric so extremely fine , that his friends
had no doubt of its passing through the eye of a needle , which was now
delivered to the king , having been kept locked up in the custody of
his majesty ' s treasurer all the time . But when the king tried to draw
the cambric through the eye of the needle , it would not pass , though
it failed but very little . Then came the second prince , who made as
sure of obtaining the crown as his brother had done , but , alas ! with
no better success; for though his piece of cambric was exquisitely
fine , yet it could not be drawn through the eye of the needle . It was
now the turn of the youngest prince , who accordingly advanced , and
opening an elegant little box inlaid with jewels , took out a walnut
and cracked the shell , imagining he should immediately perceive his
piece of cambric; but what was his astonishment to see nothing but a
filbert ! He did not , however , lose his hopes; he cracked the filbert , 
and it presented him with a cherry-stone . The lords of the court , who
had assembled to witness this extraordinary trial , could not , any more
than the princes his brothers , refrain from laughing , to think he
should be so silly as to claim the crown on no better pretensions . The
prince , however , cracked the cherry-stone , which was filled with a
kernel; he divided it , and found in the middle a grain of wheat , and
in that a grain of millet-seed . He was now absolutely confounded , and
could not help muttering between his teeth ,  " O white cat , white cat , 
thou hast deceived me ! " At this instant he felt his hand scratched by
the claw of a cat; upon which he again took courage , and opening the
grain of millet-seed , to the astonishment of all present , he drew
forth a piece of cambric four hundred yards long , and fine enough to
be threaded with perfect ease through the eye of the needle . 

When the king found he had no pretext left for refusing the crown to
his youngest son , he sighed deeply , and it was easy to be seen that he
was sorry for the prince ' s success . 

 " My sons , " said he ,  " it is so gratifying to the heart of a father to
receive proofs of his children ' s love and obedience , that I cannot
refuse myself the satisfaction of requiring of you one thing more . 
You must undertake another expedition . That one of you , who , by the
end of a year , brings me the most beautiful lady , shall marry her and
obtain my crown . " 

So they again took leave of the king and of each other , and set out
without delay; and in less than twelve hours , our young prince
arrived , in his splendid car , at the palace of his dear white cat . 
Everything went on as before till the end of another year . At length
only one day remained of the year , when the white cat thus addressed
him :  " To-morrow , my prince , you must present yourself at the palace of
your father , and give him a proof of your obedience . It depends only
on yourself to conduct thither the most beautiful princess ever yet
beheld , for the time is come when the enchantment by which I am bound
may be ended . You must cut off my head and tail , " continued she ,  " and
throw them into the fire . " 

 " I ! " said the prince , hastily-- " I cut off your head and tail ! You
surely mean to try my affection , which , believe me , beautiful cat , is
truly yours . " 

 " You mistake me , generous prince , " said she;  " I do not doubt your
regard; but if you wish to see me in any other form than that of a
cat , you must consent to do as I desire , when you will have done me a
service I shall never be able sufficiently to repay . " 

The prince ' s eyes filled with tears as she spoke , yet he considered
himself obliged to undertake the dreadful task; and the cat
continuing to press him with the greatest eagerness , with a trembling
hand he drew his sword , cut off her head and tail , and threw them into
the fire . No sooner was this done , than the most beautiful lady his
eyes had ever seen stood before him : and ere he had sufficiently
recovered from his surprise to speak to her , a long train of
attendants , who , at the same moment as their mistress , were changed to
their natural shapes , came to offer their congratulations to the
queen , and inquire her commands . She received them with the greatest
kindness , and ordering them to withdraw , thus addressed the astonished
prince : 

 " Do not imagine , dear prince , that I have always been a cat , or that I
am of obscure birth . My father was the monarch of six kingdoms; he
tenderly loved my mother , and left her always at liberty to follow her
own inclinations . Her prevailing passion was to travel; and a short
time before my birth , having heard of some fairies who were in
possession of the largest gardens filled with the most delicious
fruits , she had so strong a desire to eat some of them , that she set
out for the country where they lived . She arrived at their abode , 
which she found to be a magnificent palace , on all sides glittering
with gold and precious stones . She knocked a long time at the gates;
but no one came , nor could she perceive the least sign that it had any
inhabitant . The difficulty , however , did but increase the violence of
my mother ' s longing; for she saw the tops of the trees above the
garden-walls , loaded with the most luscious fruits . The queen , in
despair , ordered her attendants to place tents close to the door of
the palace; but , having waited six weeks without seeing any one pass
the gates , she fell sick of vexation , and her life was despaired of . 

 " One night , as she lay half asleep , she turned herself about , and , 
opening her eyes , perceived a little old woman , very ugly and
deformed , seated in the easy-chair by her bedside .  ' I and my sister
fairies , ' said she ,  ' take it very ill that your majesty should so
obstinately persist in getting some of our fruit; but since so
precious a life is at stake , we consent to give you as much as you can
carry away , provided you will give us in return what we shall ask . ' 
 ' Ah ! kind fairy , ' cried the queen ,  ' I will give you anything that I
possess , even my very kingdoms , on condition that I eat of your
fruit . ' The old fairy then informed the queen that what they required
was , that she should give them the child she was going to have , as
soon as it should be born; adding , that every possible care should be
taken of it , and that it should become the most accomplished princess . 
The queen replied that , however cruel the conditions , she must accept
them , since nothing but the fruit could save her life . In short , dear
prince , " continued the lady ,  " my mother instantly got out of bed , was
dressed by her attendants , entered the palace , and satisfied her
longing . Having eaten her fill , she ordered four thousand mules to be
procured and loaded with the fruit , which had the virtue of continuing
all the year round in a state of perfection . Thus provided , she
returned to the king my father , who , with the whole court , received
her with rejoicings , as it was before imagined she would die of
disappointment . All this time the queen said nothing to my father of
the promise she had made to give her daughter to the fairies; so that
when the time was come that she expected my birth , she grew very
melancholy; till at length , being pressed by the king , she declared to
him the truth . Nothing could exceed his affliction when he heard that
his only child , when born , was to be given to the fairies . He bore it , 
however , as well as he could , for fear of adding to my mother ' s grief;
and also believing he should find some means of keeping me in a place
of safety , which the fairies would not be able to approach . As soon , 
therefore , as I was born , he had me conveyed to a tower in the palace , 
to which there were twenty flights of stairs , and a door to each , of
which my father kept the key , so that none came near me without his
consent . When the fairies heard of what had been done , they sent first
to demand me; and on my father ' s refusal , they let loose a monstrous
dragon , which devoured men , women , and children , and which , by the
breath of its nostrils , destroyed everything it came near , so that
even the trees and plants began to die . The grief of the king was
excessive; and , finding that his whole kingdom would in a short time
be reduced to famine , he consented to give me into their hands . I was
accordingly laid in a cradle of mother-o ' -pearl , ornamented with gold
and jewels , and carried to their palace , when the dragon immediately
disappeared . The fairies placed me in a tower , elegantly furnished , 
but to which there was no door , so that whoever approached was obliged
to come by the windows , which were a great height from the ground : 
from these I had the liberty of getting out into a delightful garden , 
in which were baths , and every sort of cooling fruit . In this place
was I educated by the fairies , who behaved to me with the greatest
kindness; my clothes were splendid , and I was instructed in every kind
of accomplishment; in short , prince , if I had never seen anyone but
themselves , I should have remained very happy . One day , however , as I
was talking at the window with my parrot , I perceived a young
gentleman who was listening to our conversation . As I had never seen a
man but in pictures , I was not sorry for the opportunity of gratifying
my curiosity . I thought him a very pleasing object , and he at length
bowed in the most respectful manner , without daring to speak , for he
knew that I was in the palace of the fairies . When it began to grow
dark , he went away , and I vainly endeavoured to see which road he
took . The next morning , as soon as it was light , I again placed myself
at the window , and had the pleasure of seeing that the gentleman had
returned to the same place . He now spoke to me through a
speaking-trumpet , and informed me he thought me a most charming lady , 
and that he should be very unhappy if he did not pass his life in my
company . 

 " I resolved to find some means of escaping from my tower , and was not
long in devising the means for the execution of my project : I begged
the fairies to bring me a netting-needle , a mesh , and some cord , 
saying I wished to make some nets to amuse myself with catching birds
at my window . This they readily complied with , and in a short time I
completed a ladder long enough to reach to the ground . I now sent my
parrot to the prince , to beg he would come to the usual place , as I
wished to speak with him . He did not fail; and finding the ladder , 
mounted it , and quickly entered my tower . This at first alarmed me , 
but the charms of his conversation had restored me to tranquillity , 
when all at once the window opened , and the Fairy Violent , mounted on
the dragon ' s back , rushed into the tower . My beloved prince thought of
nothing but how to defend me from their fury; for I had had time to
relate to him my story , previous to this cruel interruption; but their
numbers overpowered him , and the Fairy Violent had the barbarity to
command the dragon to devour my lover before my eyes . In my despair , I
would have thrown myself also into the mouth of the horrible monster;
but this they took care to prevent , saying , my life should be
preserved for greater punishment . The fairy then touched me with her
wand , and I instantly became a white cat . She next conducted me to
this palace , which belonged to my father , and gave me a train of cats
for my attendants , together with the twelve hands that waited on your
highness . She then informed me of my birth and the death of my
parents , and pronounced upon me what she imagined the greatest of
maledictions; that I should not be restored to my natural figure until
a young prince , the perfect resemblance of him I had lost , should cut
off my head and tail . You are that perfect resemblance; and
accordingly you ended the enchantment . I need not add , that I already
love you more than my life; let us therefore hasten to the palace of
the king your father , and obtain his approbation to our marriage . " 

The prince and princess accordingly set out side by side , in a car of
still greater splendour than before , and reached the palace just as
the two brothers had arrived with two beautiful princesses . The king , 
hearing that each of his sons had succeeded in finding what he had
required , again began to think of some new expedient to delay the time
of his resigning the crown; but when the whole court were with the
king assembled to pass judgment , the princess who accompanied the
youngest , perceiving his thoughts by his countenance , stepped
majestically forward and thus addressed him : 

 " It is a pity that your majesty , who is so capable of governing , 
should think of resigning the crown ! I am fortunate enough to have six
kingdoms in my possession; permit me to bestow one on each of the
eldest princes , and to enjoy the remaining four in the society of the
youngest . And may it please your majesty to keep your own kingdom , and
make no decision concerning the beauty of three princesses , who , 
without such a proof of your majesty ' s preference , will no doubt live
happily together ! " 

The air resounded with the applauses of the assembly : the young prince
and princess embraced the king , and next their brothers and sisters : 
the three weddings immediately took place , and the kingdoms were
divided as the princess had proposed . 


