Some years before my beard announced approaching manhood , or , in
other words , when I was neither man nor boy , but between both , I
expressed in repeated conversations a strong desire of seeing the
world , from which I was discouraged by my parents , though my
father had been no inconsiderable traveller himself . A cousin by
my mother ' s side took a liking to me , often said I was a fine
forward youth , and was much inclined to gratify my curiosity . His
eloquence had more effect than mine , for my father consented to my
accompanying him in a voyage to the island of Ceylon , where his
uncle had resided as governor many years . 

We sailed from Amsterdam with despatches from their High
Mightinesses the States of Holland , and in about six weeks we
arrived at Ceylon , where we were received with great marks of
friendship and true politeness . 

After we had resided at Ceylon about a fortnight I accompanied one
of the governor ' s brothers upon a shooting party . 

Near the banks of a large piece of water , which had engaged my
attention , I thought I heard a rustling noise behind; on turning
about I was almost petrified  ( as who would not be ? ) at the sight
of a lion , which was evidently approaching with the intention of
satisfying his appetite with my poor carcass , and that without
asking my consent . 

What was to be done in this horrible dilemma ? I had not even a
moment for reflection; my piece was only charged with swan-shot , 
and I had no other about me . However , though I could have no idea
of killing such an animal with that weak kind of ammunition , yet I
had some hopes of frightening him by the report , and perhaps of
wounding him also . I immediately let fly , without waiting till he
was within reach; and the report did but enrage him , for he now
quickened his pace and seemed to approach me full speed . I
attempted to escape , but that only added  ( if an addition could be
made ) to my distress; for the moment I turned about I found a
large crocodile , with his mouth extended almost ready to receive
me . On my right hand was the piece of water before mentioned , and
on my left a deep precipice , said to have , as I have since
learned , a receptacle at the bottom for venomous creatures; in
short , I gave myself up as lost , for the lion was now upon his
hind legs , just in the act of seizing me . I fell involuntarily to
the ground with fear , and , as it afterward appeared , he sprang
over me . I lay some time in a situation which no language can
describe , expecting to feel his teeth or talons in some part of me
every moment . After waiting in this prostrate situation a few
seconds , I heard a violent but unusual noise , differing from any
sound that had ever before assailed my ears; nor is it at all to
be wondered at , when I inform you from whence it proceeded . 
After listening for some time , I ventured to raise my head and
look round , when , to my unspeakable joy , I perceived the lion had , 
by the eagerness with which he sprang at me , jumped forward , as I
fell , into the crocodile ' s mouth ! which , as before observed , was
wide open; the head of the one stuck in the throat of the other , 
and they were struggling to extricate themselves . I fortunately
recollected my hunting knife which was by my side; with this
instrument I severed the lion ' s head at one blow , and the body
fell at my feet ! I then , with the butt-end of my fowling-piece , 
rammed the head farther into the throat of the crocodile , and
destroyed him , by suffocation , for he could neither gorge nor
eject it . 

Soon after I had thus gained a complete victory over my two
powerful adversaries , my companion arrived in search of me; for
finding I did not follow him into the wood , he returned , 
apprehending I had lost my way or met with some accident . 

After mutual congratulations we measured the crocodile , which was
just forty feet in length . 




CROSSING THE THAMES WITHOUT THE AID OF BRIDGE , BOAT OR BALLOON

By R . E . Raspe


My first visit to England was about the beginning of George the
Third ' s reign . I had occasion to go down to Wapping to see some
goods shipped , which I was sending to some friends at Hamburgh : 
after that business was over , I took the Tower Wharf in my way
back . Here I found the sun very powerful , and I was so much
fatigued that I stepped into one of the cannon to compose me , 
where I fell fast asleep . 

This was about noon; it was the fourth of June , the king ' s
birthday . Exactly at one o ' clock these cannon were all discharged
in memory of the day they had been all charged that morning , and
having no suspicion of my situation , I was shot over the houses on
the opposite side of the river , into a farmer ' s yard , between
Bermondsey and Deptford , where I fell upon a large haystack
without waking , and continued there in a sound sleep till hay
became so extravagantly dear  ( which was about three months after ) , 
that the farmer found it to his interest to send his whole stock
to market . The stack I was reposing on was the largest in the
yard , containing about five hundred load; they began to cut that
first . I waked  ( with the voices of the people who had ascended the
ladders to begin at the top ) and got up , totally ignorant of my
situation . In attempting to run away , I fell upon the farmer to
whom the hay belonged , and broke his neck , yet received no injury
myself ! I afterwards found , to my great consolation , that this
fellow was a most detestable character , always keeping the produce
of his grounds for extravagant markets . 


