Once upon a time , in the middle of winter , when the flakes of snow
fell like feathers from the sky , a queen sat at a window set in an
ebony frame , and sewed . While she was sewing and watching the snow
fall , she pricked her finger with her needle , and three drops of blood
dropped on the snow . And because the crimson looked so beautiful on
the white snow , she thought ,  " Oh that I had a child as white as snow , 
as red as blood , and as black as the wood of this ebony frame ! " 

Soon afterwards she had a little daughter , who was as white as snow , 
as red as blood , and had hair as black as ebony . And when the child
was born , the queen died . 

After a year had gone by , the king took another wife . She was a
handsome lady , but proud and haughty , and could not endure that any
one should surpass her in beauty . She had a wonderful mirror , and
whenever she walked up to it , and looked at herself in it , she said : 

  " Little glass upon the wall , 
 Who is fairest among us all ? " 

Then the mirror replied : 

  " Lady queen , so grand and tall , 
 Thou art the fairest of them all . " 

And she was satisfied , for she knew the mirror always told the truth . 
But Snowdrop grew ever taller and fairer , and at seven years old was
beautiful as the day , and more beautiful than the queen herself . So
once , when the queen asked of her mirror : 

  " Little glass upon the wall , 
 Who is fairest among us all ? " 

it answered : 

  " Lady queen , you are grand and tall , 
 But Snowdrop is fairest of you all . " 

Then the queen was startled , and turned yellow and green with envy . 
From that hour she so hated Snowdrop , that she burned with secret
wrath whenever she saw the maiden . Pride and envy grew apace like
weeds in her heart , till she had no rest day or night . So she called a
huntsman and said ,  " Take the child out in the forest , for I will
endure her no longer in my sight . Kill her , and bring me her lungs and
liver as tokens that you have done it . " 

The huntsman obeyed , and led the child away; but when he had drawn his
hunting-knife , and was about to pierce Snowdrop ' s innocent heart , she
began to weep , and said ,  " Ah ! dear huntsman , spare my life , and I will
run deep into the wild forest , and never more come home . " 

The huntsman took pity on her , because she looked so lovely , and said , 
 " Run away then , poor child ! " -- " The wild beasts will soon make an end
of thee , " he thought; but it seemed as if a stone had been rolled from
his heart , because he had avoided taking her life; and as a little
bear came by just then , he killed it , took out its liver and lungs , 
and carried them as tokens to the queen . She made the cook dress them
with salt , and then the wicked woman ate them , and thought she had
eaten Snowdrop ' s lungs and liver . The poor child was now all alone in
the great forest , and she felt frightened as she looked at all the
leafy trees , and knew not what to do . So she began to run , and ran
over the sharp stones , and through the thorns; and the wild beasts
passed close to her , but did her no harm . She ran as long as her feet
could carry her , and when evening closed in , she saw a little house , 
and went into it to rest herself . Everything in the house was very
small , but I cannot tell you how pretty and clean it was . 

There stood a little table , covered with a white tablecloth , on which
were seven little plates  ( each little plate with its own little
spoon ) --also seven little knives and forks , and seven little cups . 
Round the walls stood seven little beds close together , with sheets as
white as snow . Snowdrop being so hungry and thirsty , ate a little of
the vegetables and bread on each plate , and drank a drop of wine from
every cup , for she did not like to empty one entirely . 

Then , being very tired , she laid herself down in one of the beds , but
could not make herself comfortable , for one was too long , and another
too short . The seventh , luckily , was just right; so there she stayed , 
said her prayers , and fell asleep . 

When it was grown quite dark , home came the masters of the house , 
seven dwarfs , who delved and mined for iron among the mountains . They
lighted their seven candles , and as soon as there was a light in the
kitchen , they saw that some one had been there , for it was not quite
so orderly as they had left it . 

The first said ,  " Who has been sitting on my stool ? " 

The second ,  " Who has eaten off my plate ? " 

The third ,  " Who has taken part of my loaf ? " 

The fourth ,  " Who has touched my vegetables ? " 

The fifth ,  " Who has used my fork ? " 

The sixth ,  " Who has cut with my knife ? " 

The seventh ,  " Who has drunk out of my little cup ? " 

Then the first dwarf looked about , and saw that there was a slight
hollow in his bed , so he asked ,  " Who has been lying in my little bed ? " 

The others came running , and each called out ,  " Some one has also been
lying in my bed . " 

But the seventh , when he looked in his bed , saw Snowdrop there , fast
asleep . He called the others , who flocked round with cries of
surprise , fetched their seven candles , and cast the light on Snowdrop . 

 " Oh , heaven ! " they cried ,  " what a lovely child ! " and were so pleased
that they would not wake her , but let her sleep on in the little bed . 
The seventh dwarf slept with all his companions in turn , an hour with
each , and so they spent the night . When it was morning , Snowdrop woke
up , and was frightened when she saw the seven dwarfs . They were very
friendly , however , and inquired her name . 

 " Snowdrop , " answered she . 

 " How have you found your way to our house ? " further asked the dwarfs . 

So she told them how her stepmother had tried to kill her , how the
huntsman had spared her life , and how she had run the whole day
through , till at last she had found their little house . 

Then the dwarfs said ,  " If thou wilt keep our house , cook , make the
beds , wash , sew and knit , and make all neat and clean , thou canst stay
with us , and shalt want for nothing . " 

 " I will , right willingly , " said Snowdrop . So she dwelt with them , and
kept their house in order . Every morning they went out among the
mountains , to seek iron and gold , and came home ready for supper in
the evening . 

The maiden being left alone all day long , the good dwarfs warned her , 
saying ,  " Beware of thy wicked stepmother , who will soon find out that
thou art here; take care that thou lettest nobody in . " 

The queen , however , after having , as she thought , eaten Snowdrop ' s
lungs and liver , had no doubt that she was again the first and fairest
woman in the world; so she walked up to her mirror , and said : 

  " Little glass upon the wall , 
 Who is fairest among us all ? " 

The mirror replied : 

  " Lady queen , so grand and tall , 
 Here , you are fairest of them all : 
 But over the hills , with the seven dwarfs old , 
 Lives Snowdrop , fairer a hundredfold . " 

She trembled , knowing the mirror never told a falsehood; she felt sure
that the huntsman had deceived her , and that Snowdrop was still alive . 
She pondered once more , late and early , early and late , how best to
kill Snowdrop; for envy gave her no rest , day or night , while she
herself was not the fairest lady in the land . When she had planned
what to do , she painted her face , dressed herself like an old
pedlar-woman , and altered her appearance so much , that no one could
have known her . In this disguise she went over the seven hills , to
where the seven dwarfs dwelt , knocked at the door , and cried ,  " Good
wares , cheap ! very cheap ! " 

Snowdrop looked out of the window and cried ,  " Good morning , good
woman : what have you to sell ? " 

 " Good wares , smart wares , " answered the queen-- " bodice laces of all
colours; " and drew out one which was woven of coloured silk . 

 " I may surely let this honest dame in ! " thought Snowdrop; so she
unfastened the door , and bought for herself the pretty lace . 

 " Child , " said the old woman ,  " what a figure thou art ! Let me lace thee
for once properly . " Snowdrop feared no harm , so stepped in front of
her , and allowed her bodice to be fastened up with the new lace . 

But the old woman laced so quick and laced so tight , that Snowdrop ' s
breath was stopped , and she fell down as if dead .  " Now I am fairest at
last , " said the old woman to herself , and sped away . 

The seven dwarfs came home soon after , at eventide , but how alarmed
were they to find their poor Snowdrop lifeless on the ground ! They
lifted her up , and , seeing that she was laced too tightly , cut the
lace of her bodice; she began to breathe faintly , and slowly returned
to life . When the dwarfs heard what had happened , they said ,  " The old
pedlar-woman was none other than the wicked queen . Be careful of
thyself , and open the door to no one if we are not at home . " 

The cruel stepmother walked up to her mirror when she reached home , 
and said : 

  " Little glass upon the wall , 
 Who is fairest among us all ? " 

To which it answered , as usual : 

  " Lady queen , so grand and tall , 
 Here , you are fairest of them all;
 But over the hills , with the seven dwarfs old , 
 Lives Snowdrop , fairer a hundredfold . " 

When she heard this , she was so alarmed that all the blood rushed to
her heart , for she saw plainly that Snowdrop was still alive . 

 " This time , " said she ,  " I will think of some means that shall destroy
her utterly; " and with the help of witchcraft , in which she was
skilful , she made a poisoned comb . Then she changed her dress and took
the shape of another old woman . 

Again she crossed the seven hills to the home of the seven dwarfs , 
knocked at the door , and cried ,  " Good wares , very cheap ! " 

Snowdrop looked out and said ,  " Go away--I dare let no one in . " 

 " You may surely be allowed to look ! " answered the old woman , and she
drew out the poisoned comb and held it up . The girl was so pleased
with it that she let herself be cajoled , and opened the door . 

When the bargain was struck , the dame said ,  " Now let me dress your
hair properly for once . " Poor Snowdrop took no heed , and let the old
woman begin; but the comb had scarcely touched her hair before the
poison worked , and she fell down senseless . 

 " Paragon of beauty ! " said the wicked woman ,  " all is over with thee
now , " and went away . 

Luckily , it was near evening , and the seven dwarfs soon came home . 
When they found Snowdrop lifeless on the ground , they at once
distrusted her stepmother . They searched , and found the poisoned comb;
and as soon as they had drawn it out , Snowdrop came to herself , and
told them what had happened . Again they warned her to be careful , and
open the door to no one . 

The queen placed herself before the mirror at home and said : 

  " Little glass upon the wall , 
 Who is fairest among us all ? " 

But it again answered : 

  " Lady queen , so grand and tall , 
 Here you are fairest of them all;
 But over the hills , with the seven dwarfs old , 
 Lives Snowdrop , fairer a thousandfold . " 

When she heard the mirror speak thus , she quivered with rage . 
 " Snowdrop shall die , " she cried ,  " if it costs my own life ! " 

Then she went to a secret and lonely chamber , where no one ever
disturbed her , and compounded an apple of deadly poison . Ripe and rosy
cheeked , it was so beautiful to look upon , that all who saw it longed
for it; but it brought death to any who should eat it . When the apple
was ready , she painted her face , disguised herself as a peasant-woman , 
and journeyed over the seven hills to where the seven dwarfs dwelt . At
the sound of the knock , Snowdrop put her head out of the window , and
said ,  " I cannot open the door to anybody , for the seven dwarfs have
forbidden me to do so . " 

 " Very well , " replied the peasant-woman;  " I only want to be rid of my
apples . Here , I will give you one of them ! " 

 " No ! " said Snowdrop ,  " I dare not take it . " 

 " Art thou afraid of being poisoned ? " asked the old woman .  " Look here;
I will cut the apple in two , and you shall eat the rosy side , and I
the white . " 

Now the fruit was so cunningly made , that only the rosy side was
poisoned . Snowdrop longed for the pretty apple; and when she saw the
peasant-woman eating it , she could resist no longer , but stretched out
her hand and took the poisoned half . She had scarcely tasted it , when
she fell lifeless to the ground . 

The queen , laughing loudly , watched her with a barbarous look , and
cried ,  " O thou who art white as snow , red as blood , and black as
ebony , the seven dwarfs cannot awaken thee this time ! " 

And when she asked the mirror at home , 

  " Little glass upon the wall , 
 Who is fairest among us all ? " 

the mirror at last replied , 

  " Lady queen , so grand and tall , 
 You are the fairest of them all . " 

So her envious heart had as much repose as an envious heart can ever
know . 

When the dwarfs came home in the evening , they found Snowdrop lying
breathless and motionless on the ground . They lifted her up , searched
whether she had anything poisonous about her , unlaced her , combed her
hair , washed her with water and with wine; but all was useless , for
they could not bring the darling back to life . They laid her on a
bier , and all the seven placed themselves round it , and mourned for
her three long days . Then they would have buried her , but that she
still looked so fresh and life-like , and had such lovely rosy cheeks . 
 " We cannot lower her into the dark earth , " said they; and caused a
transparent coffin of glass to be made , so that she could be seen on
all sides , and laid her in it , writing her name outside in letters of
gold , which told that she was the daughter of a king . Then they placed
the coffin on the mountain above , and one of them always stayed by it
and guarded it . But there was little need to guard it , for even the
wild animals came and mourned for Snowdrop : the birds likewise--first
an owl , and then a raven , and afterwards a dove . 

Long , long years , did Snowdrop lie in her coffin unchanged , looking as
though asleep , for she was still white as snow , red as blood , and her
hair was black as ebony . At last the son of a king chanced to wander
into the forest , and came to the dwarf ' s house for a night ' s shelter . 
He saw the coffin on the mountain with the beautiful Snowdrop in it , 
and read what was written there in letters of gold . Then he said to
the dwarfs ,  " Let me have the coffin ! I will give you whatever you like
to ask for it . " 

But the dwarfs answered ,  " We would not part with it for all the gold
in the world . " 

He said again ,  " Yet give it me; for I cannot live without seeing
Snowdrop , and though she is dead , I will prize and honour her as my
beloved . " 

Then the good dwarfs took pity on him , and gave him the coffin . The
prince had it borne away by his servants . They happened to stumble
over a bush , and the shock forced the bit of poisoned apple which
Snowdrop had tasted out of her throat . Immediately she opened her
eyes , raised the coffin-lid , and sat up alive once more .  " Oh , heaven ! " 
cried she ,  " where am I ? " 

The prince answered joyfully ,  " Thou art with me , " and told her what
had happened , saying ,  " I love thee more dearly than anything else in
the world . Come with me to my father ' s castle , and be my wife . " 

Snowdrop , well pleased , went with him , and they were married with much
state and grandeur . 

The wicked stepmother was invited to the feast . Richly dressed , she
stood before the mirror , and asked of it : 

  " Little glass upon the wall , 
 Who is fairest among us all ? " 

The mirror answered : 

  " Lady queen , so grand and tall , 
 Here , you are fairest among them all;
 But the young queen over the mountains old , 
 Is fairer than you a thousandfold . " 

The evil-hearted woman uttered a curse , and could scarcely endure her
anguish . She first resolved not to attend the wedding , but curiosity
would not allow her to rest . She determined to travel , and see who
that young queen could be , who was the most beautiful in all the
world . When she came , and found that it was Snowdrop alive again , she
stood petrified with terror and despair . Then two iron shoes , heated
burning hot , were drawn out of the fire with a pair of tongs , and laid
before her feet . She was forced to put them on , and to go and dance at
Snowdrop ' s wedding--dancing , dancing on these red hot shoes till she
fell down dead . 


