There was once a woman who had three daughters , of whom the eldest was
named  " One Eye , " because she had only one eye in the middle of her
forehead . The second had two eyes , like other people , and she was called
 " Two Eyes . " The youngest had three eyes , two like her second sister , and
one in the middle of her forehead , like the eldest , and she bore the
name of  " Three Eyes . " 

Now because little Two Eyes looked just like other people , her mother
and sisters could not endure her . They said to her ,  " You are not better
than common folks , with your two eyes; you don ' t belong to us . " 

So they pushed her about , and threw all their old clothes to her for her
to wear , and gave her only the pieces that were left to eat , and did
everything that they could to make her miserable . It so happened that
little Two Eyes was sent into the fields to take care of the goats , and
she was often very hungry , although her sisters had as much as they
liked to eat . So one day she seated herself on a mound in the field , and
began to weep and cry so bitterly that two little rivulets flowed from
her eyes . Once , in the midst of her sorrow she looked up , and saw a
woman standing near her who said ,  " What are you weeping for , little Two
Eyes ? " 

 " I cannot help weeping , " she replied;  " for because I have two eyes , like
other people , my mother and sisters cannot bear me; they push me about
from one corner to another and make we wear their old clothes , and give
me nothing to eat but what is left , so that I am always hungry . To-day
they gave me so little that I am nearly starved . " 

 " Dry up your tears , little Two Eyes , " said the wise woman;  " I will tell
you something to do which will prevent you from ever being hungry again . 
You have only to say to your own goat : 

  " ' Little goat , if you ' re able , 
 Pray deck out my table , ' 

 " and immediately there will be a pretty little table before you full of
all sorts of good things for you to eat , as much as you like . And when
you have had enough , and you do not want the table any more , you need
only say : 

  " ' Little goat , when you ' re able , 
 Remove my nice table , ' 

 " and it will vanish from your eyes . " 

Then the wise woman went away .  " Now , " thought little Two Eyes ,  " I will
try if what she says is true , for I am very hungry , " so she said : 

  " Little goat , if you ' re able , 
 Pray deck out my table . " 

The words were scarcely spoken , when a beautiful little table stood
really before her; it had a white cloth and plates , and knives and
forks , and silver spoons , and such a delicious dinner , smoking hot as if
it had just come from the kitchen . Then little Two Eyes sat down and
said the shortest grace she knew-- " Pray God be our guest for all time . 
Amen " --before she allowed herself to taste anything . But oh , how she did
enjoy her dinner ! and when she had finished , she said , as the wise woman
had taught her : 

  " Little goat , when you ' re able , 
 Remove my nice table . " 

In a moment , the table and everything upon it had disappeared .  " That is
a pleasant way to keep house , " said little Two Eyes , and felt quite
contented and happy . In the evening , when she went home with the goat , 
she found an earthenware dish with some scraps which her sisters had
left for her , but she did not touch them . The next morning she went away
with the goat , leaving them behind where they had been placed for her . 
The first and second times that she did so , the sisters did not notice
it; but when they found it happened every day , they said one to the
other ,  " There is something strange about little Two Eyes , she leaves her
supper every day , and all that has been put for her has been wasted; she
must get food somewhere else . " 

So they determined to find out the truth , and they arranged that when
Two Eyes took her goat to the field , One Eye should go with her to take
particular notice of what she did , and discover if anything was brought
for her to eat and drink . 

So when Two Eyes started with her goat , One Eye said to her ,  " I am going
with you to-day to see if the goat gets her food properly while you are
watching the rest . " 

But Two Eyes knew what she had in her mind . So she drove the goat into
the long grass , and said ,  " Come , One Eye , let us sit down here and rest , 
and I will sing to you . " 

One Eye seated herself , and , not being accustomed to walk so far , or to
be out in the heat of the sun , she began to feel tired , and as little
Two Eyes kept on singing , she closed her one eye and fell fast asleep . 

When Two Eyes saw this , she knew that One Eye could not betray her , so
she said : 

  " Little goat , if you are able , 
 Come and deck my pretty table . " 

She seated herself when it appeared , and ate and drank very quickly , and
when she had finished she said : 

  " Little goat , when you are able , 
 Come and clear away my table . " 

It vanished in the twinkling of an eye; and then Two Eyes woke up One
Eye , and said ,  " Little One Eye , you are a clever one to watch goats;
for , while you are asleep , they might be running all over the world . 
Come , let us go home ! " 

So they went to the house , and little Two Eyes again left the scraps on
the dish untouched , and One Eye could not tell her mother whether little
Two Eyes had eaten anything in the field; for she said to excuse
herself ,  " I was asleep . " 

The next day the mother said to Three Eyes ,  " You must go to the field
this time , and find out whether there is anyone who brings food to
little Two Eyes; for she must eat and drink secretly . " 

So when little Two Eyes started with her goat , Three Eyes followed , and
said ,  " I am going with you to-day , to see if the goats are properly fed
and watched . " 

But Two Eyes knew her thoughts; so she led the goat through the long
grass to tire Three Eyes , and at last she said ,  " Let us sit down here
and rest , and I will sing to you , Three Eyes . " 

She was glad to sit down , for the walk and the heat of the sun had
really tired her; and , as her sister continued her song , she was obliged
to close two of her eyes , and they slept , but not the third . In fact , 
Three Eyes was wide awake with one eye , and heard and saw all that Two
Eyes did; for poor little Two Eyes , thinking she was asleep , said her
speech to the goat , and the table came with all the good things on it , 
and was carried away when Two Eyes had eaten enough; and the cunning
Three Eyes saw it all with her one eye . But she pretended to be asleep
when her sister came to wake her and told her she was going home . 

That evening , when little Two Eyes again left the supper they placed
aside for her , Three Eyes said to her mother ,  " I know where the proud
thing gets her good eating and drinking; " and then she described all she
had seen in the field .  " I saw it all with one eye , " she said;  " for she
had made my other two eyes close with her fine singing , but luckily the
one in my forehead remained open . " 

Then the envious mother cried out to poor little Two Eyes ,  " You wish to
have better food than we , do you ? You shall lose your wish ! " She took up
a butcher ' s knife , went out , and stuck the good little goat in the
heart , and it fell dead . 

When little Two Eyes saw this , she went out into the field , seated
herself on a mound , and wept most bitter tears . 

Presently the wise woman stood again before her , and said ,  " Little Two
Eyes , why do you weep ? " 

 " Ah ! " she replied ,  " I must weep . The goat , who every day spread my table
so beautifully , has been killed by my mother , and I shall have again to
suffer from hunger and sorrow . " 

 " Little Two Eyes , " said the wise woman ,  " I will give you some good
advice . Go home , and ask your sister to give you the inside of the
slaughtered goat , and then go and bury it in the ground in front of the
house-door . " 

On saying this the wise woman vanished . 

Little Two Eyes went home quickly , and said to her sister ,  " Dear sister , 
give me some part of my poor goat . I don ' t want anything valuable; only
give me the inside . " 

Her sister laughed , and said ,  " Of course you can have that , if you don ' t
want anything else . " 

So little Two Eyes took the inside; and in the evening , when all was
quiet , buried it in the ground outside the house-door , as the wise woman
had told her to do . 

The next morning , when they all rose and looked out of the window , there
stood a most wonderful tree , with leaves of silver and apples of gold
hanging between them . Nothing in the wide world could be more beautiful
or more costly . They none of them knew how the tree could come there in
one night , excepting little Two Eyes . She supposed it had grown up from
the inside of the goat; for it stood over where she had buried it in the
earth . 

Then said the mother to little One Eye ,  " Climb up , my child , and break
off some of the fruit from the tree . " 

One Eye climbed up , but when she tried to catch a branch and pluck one
of the apples , it escaped from her hand , and so it happened every time
she made the attempt , and , do what she would , she could not reach one . 

 " Three Eyes , " said the mother ,  " climb up , and try what you can do;
perhaps you will be able to see better with your three eyes than One Eye
can . " 

One Eye slid down from the tree , and Three Eyes climbed up . But Three
Eyes was not more skilful; with all her efforts she could not draw the
branches , nor the fruit , near enough to pluck even a leaf , for they
sprang back as she put out her hand . 

At last the mother was impatient , and climbed up herself , but with no
more success , for , as she appeared to grasp a branch , or fruit , her hand
closed upon thin air . 

 " May I try ? " said little Two Eyes;  " perhaps I may succeed . " 

 " You , indeed ! " cried her sisters;  " you , with your two eyes , what can you
do ? " 

But Two Eyes climbed up , and the golden apples did not fly back from her
when she touched them , but almost laid themselves on her hand , and she
plucked them one after another , till she carried down her own little
apron full . 

The mother took them from her , and gave them to her sisters , as she said
little Two Eyes did not handle them properly; but this was only from
jealousy , because little Two Eyes was the only one who could reach the
fruit , and she went into the house feeling more spiteful to her than
ever . 

It happened that while all three sisters were standing under the tree
together a young knight rode by .  " Run away , quick , and hide yourself , 
little Two Eyes; hide yourself somewhere , for we shall be quite ashamed
for you to be seen . " Then they pushed the poor girl , in great haste , 
under an empty cask , which stood near the tree , and several of the
golden apples that she had plucked along with her . 

As the knight came nearer they saw he was a handsome man; and presently
he halted , and looked with wonder and pleasure at the beautiful tree
with its silver leaves and golden fruit . 

At last he spoke to the sisters , and asked :  " To whom does this beautiful
tree belong ? If a man possessed only one branch he might obtain all he
wished for in the world . " 

 " This tree belongs to us , " said the two sisters ,  " and we will break off
a branch for you if you like . " They gave themselves a great deal of
trouble in trying to do as they offered; but all to no purpose , for the
branches and the fruit evaded their efforts , and sprung back at every
touch . 

 " This is wonderful , " exclaimed the knight ,  " that the tree should belong
to you , and yet you are not able to gather even a branch . " 

They persisted , however , in declaring that the tree was their own
property . At this moment little Two Eyes , who was angry because her
sisters had not told the truth , caused two of the golden apples to slip
out from under the cask , and they rolled on till they reached the feet
of the knight ' s horse . When he saw them , he asked in astonishment where
they came from . 

The two ugly maidens replied that they had another sister , but they
dared not let him see her , for she had only two eyes , like common
people , and was named little Two Eyes . 

But the knight felt very anxious to see her , and called out ,  " Little Two
Eyes , come here . " Then came Two Eyes , quite comforted , from the empty
cask , and the knight was astonished to find her so beautiful . 

Then he said ,  " Little Two Eyes , can you break off a branch of the tree
for me ? " 

 " Oh yes , " she replied ,  " I can , very easily , for the tree belongs to me . " 
And she climbed up , and , without any trouble , broke off a branch with
its silver leaves and golden fruit and gave it to the knight . 

He looked down at her as she stood by his horse , and said :  " Little Two
Eyes , what shall I give you for this ? " 

 " Ah ! " she answered ,  " I suffer from hunger and thirst , and sorrow , and
trouble , from early morning till late at night; if you would only take
me with you , and release me , I should be so happy . " 

Then the knight lifted the little maiden on his horse , and rode home
with her to his father ' s castle . There she was given beautiful clothes
to wear , and as much to eat and drink as she wished , and as she grew up
the young knight loved her so dearly that they were married with great
rejoicings . 

Now , when the two sisters saw little Two Eyes carried away by the
handsome young knight , they were overjoyed at their good fortune .  " The
wonderful tree belongs to us now , " they said;  " even if we cannot break
off a branch , yet everybody who passes will stop to admire it , and make
acquaintance with us , and , who knows ? we may get husbands after all . " 

But when they rose the next morning , lo ! the tree had vanished , and with
it all their hopes . And on this very morning , when little Two Eyes
looked out of her chamber window of the castle , she saw , to her great
joy , that the tree had followed her . 

Little Two Eyes lived for a long time in great happiness; but she heard
nothing of her sisters , till one day two poor women came to the castle , 
to beg for alms . Little Two Eyes saw them , and , looking earnestly in
their faces , she recognised her two sisters , who had become so poor that
they were obliged to beg their bread from door to door . 

But the good sister received them most kindly , and promised to take care
of them and give them all they wanted . And then they did indeed repent
and feel sorry for having treated her so badly in their youthful days . 


