You see , my friends , Napoleon was born in Corsica , a French island , 
warmed by the sun of Italy , where it is like a furnace , and where the
people kill each other , from father to son , all about nothing : that ' s a
way they have . To begin with the marvel of the thing--his mother , who
was the handsomest woman of her time , and a knowing one , bethought
herself of dedicating him to God , so that he might escape the dangers of
his childhood and future life; for she had dreamed that the world was
set on fire the day he was born . And , indeed , it was a prophecy ! So she
asked God to protect him , on condition that Napoleon should restore His
holy religion , which was then cast to the ground . Well , that was agreed
upon , and we shall see what came of it . 

 " Follow me closely , and tell me if what you hear is in the nature or
man . 

 " Sure and certain it is that none but a man who conceived the idea of
making a compact with God could have passed unhurt through the enemy ' s
lines , through cannon-balls , and discharges of grape-shot that swept the
rest of us off like flies , and always respected his head . I had proof of
that--I myself--at Eylau . I see him now , as he rode up a height , took
his field-glass , looked at the battle , and said ,  ' All goes well . ' One of
those plumed busybodies , who plagued him considerably and followed him
everywhere , even to his meals , so they said , thought to play the wag , 
and took the Emperor ' s place as he rode away . Ho ! in a twinkling , head
and plume were off ! You must understand that Napoleon had promised to
keep the secret of his compact all to himself . That ' s why all those who
followed him , even his nearest friends , fell like nuts--Duroc , 
Bessières , Lannes--all strong as steel bars , though _he_ could bend them
as he pleased . Besides--to prove he was the child of God , and made to be
the father of soldiers--was he ever known to be lieutenant or captain ? 
No , no; commander-in-chief from the start . He didn ' t look to be more
than twenty-four years of age when he was an old general at the taking
of Toulon , where he first began to show the others that they knew
nothing about manoeuvring cannon . 

 " After that , down came our slip of a general to command the grand army
of Italy , which hadn ' t bread , nor munitions , nor shoes , nor coats--a
poor army , as naked as a worm .  ' My friends , ' said he ,  ' here we are
together . Get it into your pates that fifteen days from now you will be
conquerors--new clothes , good gaiters , famous shoes , and every man with
a great-coat; but , my children , to get these things you must march to
Milan , where they are . ' And we marched . France , crushed as flat as a
bed-bug , straightened up . We were thirty thousand bare-feet against
eighty thousand Austrian bullies , all fine men , well set-up . I see  ' em
now ! But Napoleon--he was then only Bonaparte--he knew how to put the
courage into us ! We marched by night , and we marched by day; we slapped
their faces at Montenotte , we thrashed them at Rivoli , Lodi , Arcole , 
Millesimo , and we never let  ' em up . A soldier gets the taste of
conquest . So Napoleon whirled round those Austrian generals , who didn ' t
know where to poke themselves to get out of his way , and he pelted  ' em
well--nipped off ten thousand men at a blow sometimes , by getting round
them with fifteen hundred Frenchmen , and then he gleaned as he pleased . 
He took their cannon , their supplies , their money , their munitions , in
short , all they had that was good to take . He fought them and beat them
on the mountains , he drove them into the rivers and seas , he bit  ' em in
the air , he devoured  ' em on the ground , and he lashed  ' em everywhere . 
Hey ! the grand army feathered itself well; for , d ' ye see the Emperor , 
who was a wit , called up the inhabitants and told them he was there to
deliver them . So after that the natives lodged and cherished us; the
women too , and very judicious they were . Now here ' s the end of it . In
Ventose ,  ' 96--in those times that was the month of March of to-day--we
lay cuddled in a corner of Savoie with the marmots; and yet , before that
campaign was over , we were masters of Italy , just as Napoleon had
predicted; and by the following March--in a single year and two
campaigns--he had brought us within sight of Vienna .  ' Twas a clean
sweep . We devoured their armies , one after the other , and made an end of
four Austrian generals . One old fellow , with white hair , was roasted
like a rat in the straw at Mantua . Kings begged for mercy on their
knees ! Peace was won . 

 " Could a _man_ have done that ? No; God helped him , to a certainty ! 

 " He divided himself up like the loaves in the Gospel , commanded the
battle by day , planned it by night; going and coming , for the sentinels
saw him--never eating , never sleeping . So , seeing these prodigies , the
soldiers adopted him for their father . Forward , march ! Then those
others , the rulers in Paris , seeing this , said to themselves :  ' Here ' s a
bold one that seems to get his orders from the skies; he ' s likely to put
his paw on France . We must let him loose on Asia; we will send him to
America , perhaps that will satisfy him . ' But  ' t was _written above_ for
him , as it was for Jesus Christ . The command went forth that he should
go to Egypt . See , again , his resemblance to the Son of God . But that ' s
not all . He called together his best veterans , his fire-eaters , the ones
he had particularly put the devil into , and he said to them like this : 
 ' My friends , they have given us Egypt to chew up , just to keep us busy , 
but we ' ll swallow it whole in a couple of campaigns , as we did Italy . 
The common soldiers shall be princes and have the land for their own . 
Forward , march ! '  ' Forward , march ! ' cried the sergeants , and there we
were at Toulon , road to Egypt . At that time the English had all their
ships in the sea; but when we embarked , Napoleon said :  ' They won ' t see
us . It is just as well that you should know from this time forth that
your general has got his star in the sky , which guides and protects us . ' 
What was said was done . Passing over the sea , we took Malta like an
orange , just to quench his thirst for victory; for he was a man who
couldn ' t live and do nothing . 

 " So here we are in Egypt . Good . Once here , other orders . The Egyptians , 
d ' ye see , are men who , ever since the earth was , have had giants for
sovereigns , and armies as numerous as ants; for , you must understand , 
that ' s the land of genii and crocodiles , where they ' ve built pyramids as
big as our mountains , and buried their kings under them to keep them
fresh--an idea that pleased  ' em mightily . So then , after we
disembarked , the Little Corporal said to us :  ' My children , the country
you are going to conquer has a lot of gods that you must respect;
because Frenchmen ought to be friends with everybody , and fight the
nations without vexing the inhabitants . Get it into your skulls that you
are not to touch anything at first , for it is all going to be yours
soon . Forward , march ! ' So far , so good . But all those people of Africa , 
to whom Napoleon was foretold under the name of Kébir-Bonaberdis--a word
of their lingo that means  ' the sultan fires ' --were afraid as the devil
of him . So the Grand Turk , and Asia , and Africa had recourse to magic . 
They sent us a demon , named the Mahdi , supposed to have descended from
heaven on a white horse , which , like its master , was bullet-proof; and
both of them lived on air , without food to support them . There are some
that say they saw them; but I can ' t give you any reasons to make you
certain about that . The rulers of Arabia and the Mamelukes tried to make
their troopers believe that the Mahdi could keep them from perishing in
battle; and they pretended he was an angel sent from heaven to fight
Napoleon and get back Solomon ' s seal . Solomon ' s seal was part of their
paraphernalia which they vowed our general had stolen . You must
understand that we ' d given  ' em a good many wry faces , in spite of what
he had said to us . 

 " Now , tell me how they knew that Napoleon had a pact with God ? Was that
natural , d ' ye think ? 

 " They held to it in their minds that Napoleon commanded the genii , and
could pass hither and thither in the twinkling of an eye , like a bird . 
The fact is , he was everywhere . At last , it came to his carrying off a
queen beautiful as the dawn , for whom he had offered all his treasure , 
and diamonds as big as pigeon ' s eggs--a bargain which the Mameluke to
whom she particularly belonged positively refused , although he had
several others . Such matters when they come to that pass , can ' t be
settled without a great many battles; and , indeed , there was no scarcity
of battles; there was fighting enough to please everybody . We were in
line at Alexandria , at Gizeh , and before the Pyramids; we marched in the
sun and through the sand , where some , who had the dazzles , saw water
that they couldn ' t drink , and shade where their flesh was roasted . But
we made short work of the Mamelukes; and everybody else yielded at the
voice of Napoleon , who took possession of Upper and Lower Egypt , Arabia , 
and even the capitals of kingdoms that were no more , where there were
thousands of statues and all the plagues of Egypt , more particularly
lizards--a mammoth of a country where everybody could take his acres of
land for as little as he pleased . Well , while Napoleon was busy with his
affairs inland--where he had it in his head to do fine things--the
English burned his fleet at Aboukir; for they were always looking about
them to annoy us . But Napoleon , who had the respect of the East and of
the West , whom the Pope called his son , and the cousin of Mohammed
called  ' his dear father , ' resolved to punish England , and get hold of
India in exchange for his fleet . He was just about to take us across the
Red Sea into Asia , a country where there are diamonds and gold to pay
the soldiers and palaces for bivouacs , when the Mahdi made a treaty with
the plague , and sent it down to hinder our victories . Halt ! The army to
a man defiled at that parade; and few they were who came back on their
feet . Dying soldiers couldn ' t take Saint-Jean d ' Acre , though they rushed
at it three times with generous and martial obstinacy . The Plague was
the strongest . No saying to that enemy ,  ' My good friend . ' Every soldier
lay ill . Napoleon alone was fresh as a rose , and the whole army saw him
drinking in pestilence without its doing him a bit of harm . 

 " Ha ! my friends ! will you tell me that _that ' s_ in the nature of a mere
man ? 

 " The Mamelukes , knowing we were all in the ambulances , thought they
could stop the way; but that sort of joke wouldn ' t do with Napoleon . So
he said to his demons , his veterans , those that had the toughest hide , 
 ' Go , clear me the way . ' Junot , a sabre of the first cut , and his
particular friend , took a thousand men , no more , and ripped up the army
of the pacha who had had the presumption to put himself in the way . 
After that , we came back to headquarters at Cairo . Now , here ' s another
side of the story . Napoleon absent , France was letting herself be ruined
by the rulers in Paris , who kept back the pay of the soldiers of the
other armies , and their clothing , and their rations; left them to die
of hunger , and expected them to lay down the law to the universe
without taking any trouble to help them . Idiots ! who amused themselves
by chattering , instead of putting their own hands in the dough . Well , 
that ' s how it happened that our armies were beaten , and the frontiers of
France were encroached upon : THE MAN was nor there . Now observe , I say
_man_ because that ' s what they called him; but  ' twas nonsense , for he
had a star and all its belongings; it was we who were only men . He
taught history to France after his famous battle of Aboukir , where , 
without losing more than three hundred men , and with a single division , 
he vanquished the grand army of the Turk , seventy-five thousand strong , 
and hustled more than half of it into the sea , r-r-rah ! 

 " That was his last thunder-clap in Egypt . He said to himself , seeing the
way things were going in Paris ,  ' I am the saviour of France; I know it , 
and I must go . ' But , understand me , the army didn ' t know he was going , 
or they ' d have kept him by force and made him Emperor of the East . So
now we were sad; for He was gone who was all our joy . He left the
command to Kléber , a big mastiff , who came off duty at Cairo , 
assassinated by an Egyptian , whom they put to death by empaling him on a
bayonet; that ' s the way they guillotine people down there . But it makes
 ' em suffer so much that a soldier had pity on the criminal and gave him
his canteen; and then , as soon as the Egyptian had drunk his fill , he
gave up the ghost with all the pleasure in life . But that ' s a trifle we
couldn ' t laugh at then . Napoleon embarked in a cockleshell , a little
skiff that was nothing at all , though  ' twas called  ' Fortune; ' and in a
twinkling , under the nose of England , who was blockading him with ships
of the line , frigates , and anything that could hoist a sail , he crossed
over , and there he was in France . For he always had the power , mind you , 
of crossing the seas at one straddle . 

 " Was that a human man ? Bah ! 

 " So , one minute he is at Fréjus , the next in Paris . There , they all
adore him; but he summons the government .  ' What have you done with my
children , the soldiers ? ' he says to the lawyers .  ' You ' re a mob of
rascally scribblers; you are making France a mess of pottage , and
snapping your fingers at what people think of you . It won ' t do; and I
speak the opinion of everybody . ' So , on that , they wanted to battle
with him and kill him--click ! he had  ' em locked up in barracks , or
flying out of windows , or drafted among his followers , where they were
as mute as fishes and as pliable as a quid of tobacco . After that
stroke--consul ! And then , as it was not for him to doubt the Supreme
Being , he fulfilled his promise to the good God , who , you see , had kept
His word to him . He gave Him back His churches , and reestablished His
religion; the bells rang for God and for him : and lo ! everybody was
pleased; _primo_ , the priests , whom he saved from being harassed;
_secundo_ , the bourgeois , who thought only of their trade , and no longer
had to fear the _rapiamus_ of the law , which had got to be unjust;
_tertio_ , the nobles , for he forbade they should be killed , as , 
unfortunately , the people had got the habit of doing . 

 " But he still had the Enemy to wipe out; and he wasn ' t the man to go to
sleep at a mess-table , because , d ' ye see , his eye looked over the whole
earth as if it were no bigger than a man ' s head . So then he appeared in
Italy , like as though he had stuck his head through the window . One
glance was enough . The Austrians were swallowed up at Marengo like so
many gudgeons by a whale ! Ouf ! The French eagles sang their pæans so
loud that all the world heard them--and it sufficed !  ' We won ' t play that
game any more , ' said the German .  ' Enough , enough ! ' said all the rest . To
sum up : Europe backed down , England knocked under . General peace; and
the kings and the peoples made believe kiss each other . That ' s the time
when the Emperor invented the Legion of Honour--and a fine thing , too . 
 ' In France ' --this is what he said at Boulogne before the whole
army-- ' every man is brave . So the citizen who does a fine action shall
be sister to the soldier , and the soldier shall be his brother , and the
two shall be one under the flag of honour . ' 

 " We , who were down in Egypt , now came home . All was changed ! He left us
general , and hey ! in a twinkling we found him EMPEROR . France gave
herself to him , like a fine girl to a lancer . When it was done--to the
satisfaction of all , as you may say--a sacred ceremony took place , the
like of which was never seen under the canopy of the skies . The Pope and
the cardinals , in their red and gold vestments , crossed the Alps
expressly to crown him before the army and the people , who clapped
their hands . There is one thing that I should do very wrong not to tell
you . In Egypt , in the desert close to Syria , the RED MAN came to him on
the Mount of Moses , and said ,  ' All is well . ' Then , at Marengo , the night
before the victory , the same Red Man appeared before him for the second
time , standing erect and saying :  ' Thou shalt see the world at thy feet;
thou shalt be Emperor of France , King of Italy , master of Holland , 
sovereign of Spain , Portugal , and the Illyrian provinces , protector of
Germany , saviour of Poland , first eagle of the Legion of Honour--all . ' 
This Red Man , you understand , was his genius , his spirit--a sort of
satellite who served him , as some say , to communicate with his star . I
never really believed that . But the Red Man himself is a true fact . 
Napoleon spoke of him , and said he came to him in troubled moments , and
lived in the palace of the Tuileries under the roof . So , on the day of
the coronation , Napoleon saw him for the third time; and they were in
consultation over many things . 

 " After that , Napoleon went to Milan to be crowned king of Italy , and
there the grand triumph of the soldier began . Every man who could write
was made an officer . Down came pensions; it rained duchies; treasures
poured in for the staff which didn ' t cost France a penny; and the Legion
of Honour provided incomes for the private soldiers--of which I receive
mine to this day . So here were the armies maintained as never before on
this earth . But besides that , the Emperor , knowing that he was to be the
emperor of the whole world , bethought him of the bourgeois , and to
please them he built fairy monuments , after their own ideas , in places
where you ' d never think to find any . For instance , suppose you were
coming back from Spain and going to Berlin--well , you ' d find triumphal
arches along the way , with common soldiers sculptured on the stone , 
every bit the same as generals . In two or three years , and without
imposing taxes on any of you , Napoleon filled his vaults with gold , 
built palaces , made bridges , roads , scholars , fêtes , laws , vessels , 
harbours , and spent millions upon millions--such enormous sums that he
could , so they tell me , have paved France from end to end with
five-franc pieces , if he had had a mind to . 

 " Now , when he sat at ease on his throne , and was master of all , so that
Europe waited his permission to do his bidding , he remembered his four
brothers and his three sisters , and he said to us , as it might be in
conversation , in an order of the day ,  ' My children , is it right that the
blood relations of your Emperor should be begging their bread ? No . I
wish to see them in splendour like myself . It becomes , therefore , 
absolutely necessary to conquer a kingdom for each of them--to the end
that Frenchmen may be masters over all lands , that the soldiers of the
Guard shall make the whole earth tremble , that France may spit where she
likes , and that all the nations shall say to her , as it is written on my
copper coins ,  ' _God protects you ! _ '  ' Agreed ! ' cried the army .  ' We ' ll go
fish for thy kingdoms with our bayonets . ' Ha ! there was no backing down , 
don ' t you see ! If he had taken it into his head to conquer the moon , we
should have made ready , packed knapsacks , and clambered up; happily , he
didn ' t think of it . The kings of the countries , who liked their
comfortable thrones , were , naturally , loath to budge , and had to have
their ears pulled; so then--Forward , march ! We did march; we got there;
and the earth once more trembled to its centre . Hey ! the men and the
shoes he used up in those days ! The enemy dealt us such blows that none
but the grand army could have borne the fatigue of it . But you are not
ignorant that a Frenchman is born a philosopher , and knows that a little
sooner , or a little later , he has got to die . So we were ready to die
without a word , for we liked to see the Emperor doing _that_ on the
geographies . " 

Here the narrator nimbly described a circle with his foot on the floor
of the barn . 

 " And Napoleon said ,  ' There , that ' s to be a kingdom . ' And a kingdom it
was . Ha ! the good times ! The colonels were generals; the generals , 
marshals; and the marshals , kings . There ' s one of  ' em still on his
throne , to prove it to Europe; but he ' s a Gascon and a traitor to France
for keeping that crown; and he doesn ' t blush for shame as he ought to
do , because crowns , don ' t you see , are made of gold . I who am speaking
to you , I have seen , in Paris , eleven kings and a mob of princes
surrounding Napoleon like the rays of the sun . You understand , of
course , that every soldier had the chance to mount a throne , provided
always he had the merit; so a corporal of the Guard was a sight to be
looked at as he walked along , for each man had his share in the victory , 
and  ' twas plainly set forth in the bulletin . What victories they were ! 
Austerlitz , where the army manoeuvred as if on parade; Eylau , where we
drowned the Russians in a lake , as though Napoleon had blown them into
it with the breath of his mouth; Wagram , where the army fought for three
days without grumbling . We won as many battles as there are saints in
the calendar . It was proved then , beyond a doubt , that Napoleon had the
sword of God in his scabbard . The soldiers were his friends; he made
them his children; he looked after us , he saw that we had shoes , and
shirts , and great-coats , and bread , and cartridges; but he always kept
up his majesty; for , don ' t you see ,  ' twas his business to reign . No
matter for that , however; a sergeant , and even a common soldier , could
say to him ,  ' my Emperor , ' just as you say to me sometimes ,  ' my good
friend . ' He gave us an answer if we appealed to him; he slept in the
snow like the rest of us; and , indeed , he had almost the air of a human
man . I who speak to you , I have seen him with his feet among the
grape-shot , and no more uneasy than you are now--standing steady , 
looking through his field-glass , and minding his business .  ' Twas that
kept the rest of us quiet . I don ' t know how he did it , but when he spoke
he made our hearts burn within us; and to show him we were his children , 
incapable of balking , didn ' t we rush at the mouths of the rascally
cannon , that belched and vomited shot and shell , without so much as
saying ,  ' Look out ! ' Why ! the dying must needs raise their heads to
salute him and cry ,  ' LONG LIVE THE EMPEROR ! ' 

 " I ask you , was that natural ? would they have done that for a human man ? 

 " Well , after he had settled the world , the Empress Josephine , his wife , 
a good woman all the same , managed matters so that she did not bear him
any children , and he was obliged to give her up , though he loved her
considerably . But , you see , he had to have little ones for reasons of
state . Hearing of this , all the sovereigns of Europe quarrelled as to
which of them should give him a wife . And he married , so they told us , 
an Austrian archduchess , daughter of Cæsar , an ancient man about whom
people talk a good deal , and not in France only--where any one will
tell you what he did--but in Europe . It is all true , for I myself who
address you at this moment , I have been on the Danube , and have seen the
remains of a bridge built by that man , who , it seems , was a relation of
Napoleon in Rome , and that ' s how the Emperor got the inheritance of that
city for his son . So after the marriage , which was a fête for the whole
world , and in honour of which he released the people of ten years ' 
taxes--which they had to pay all the same , however , because the
assessors didn ' t take account of what he said--his wife had a little
one , who was King of Rome . Now , there ' s a thing that had never been seen
on this earth; never before was a child born a king with his father
living . On that day a balloon went up in Paris to tell the news to Rome , 
and that balloon made the journey in one day . 

 " Now , is there any man among you who will stand up here and declare to
me that all that was human ? No; it was _written above_; and may the
scurvy seize  ' em who deny that he was sent by God himself for the
triumph of France ! 

 " Well , here ' s the Emperor of Russia , that used to be his friend , he
gets angry because Napoleon didn ' t marry a Russian; so he joins with the
English , our enemies--to whom our Emperor always wanted to say a couple
of words in their burrows , only he was prevented . Napoleon gets angry
too; an end had to be put to such doings; so he says to us :  ' Soldiers ! 
you have been masters of every capital in Europe , except Moscow , which
is now the ally of England . To conquer England , and India which belongs
to the English , it becomes our peremptory duty to go to Moscow , ' Then he
assembled the greatest army that ever trailed its gaiters over the
globe; and so marvellously in hand it was that he reviewed a million of
men in one day .  ' Hourra ! ' [9] cried the Russians . Down came all Russia
and those animals of Cossacks in a flock .  ' Twas nation against nation , a
general hurly-burly , and beware who could;  ' Asia against Europe , ' as the
Red Man had foretold to Napoleon .  ' Enough , ' cried the Emperor ,  ' I ' ll be
ready . ' 

 " So now , sure enough , came all the kings , as the Red Man had said , to
lick Napoleon ' s hand ! Austria , Prussia , Bavaria , Saxony , Poland , Italy , 
every one of them were with us , flattering us; ah , it was fine ! The
eagles never cawed so loud as at those parades , perched high above the
banners of all Europe . The Poles were bursting with joy , because
Napoleon was going to release them; and that ' s why France and Poland are
brothers to this day .  ' Russia is ours , ' cried the army . We plunged into
it well-supplied; we marched and we marched--no Russians . At last we
found the brutes entrenched on the banks of the Moskva . That ' s where I
won my cross , and I ' ve got the right to say it was a damnable battle . 
This was how it came about . The Emperor was anxious . He had seen the Red
Man , who said to him  ' My son , you are going too fast for your feet; you
will lack men; friends will betray you . ' So the Emperor offered peace . 
But before signing ,  ' Let us drub those Russians ! ' he said to us .  ' Done ! ' 
cried the army .  ' Forward , march ! ' said the sergeants . My clothes were in
rags , my shoes worn out , from trudging along those roads , which are very
uncomfortable ones; but no matter ! I said to myself ,  ' As it ' s the last
of our earthquakings , I ' ll go into it , tooth and nail ! ' We were drawn up
in line before the great ravine--front seats , as  ' twere . Signal given;
and seven hundred pieces of artillery began a conversation that would
bring the blood from your ears . Then--must do justice to one ' s
enemies--the Russians let themselves be killed like Frenchmen; they
wouldn ' t give way; we couldn ' t advance .  ' Forward ! ' some one cried ,  ' here
comes the Emperor ! ' True enough; he passed at a gallop , waving his hand
to let us know we must take the redoubt . He inspired us; on we ran; I
was the first in the ravine . Ha ! my God ! how the lieutenants fell , and
the colonels , and the soldiers ! No matter ! all the more shoes for those
that had none , and epaulets for the clever ones who knew how to read . 
 ' Victory ! ' cried the whole line;  ' Victory ! ' --and , would you believe it ? 
a thing never seen before , there lay twenty-five thousand Frenchmen on
the ground .  ' Twas like mowing down a wheat-field; only in place of the
ears of wheat put the heads of men ! We were sobered by this time--those
who were left alive . The MAN rode up; we made the circle round him . Ha ! 
he knew how to cajole his children; he could be amiable when he liked , 
and feed  ' em with words when their stomachs were ravenous with the
hunger of wolves . Flatterer ! he distributed the crosses himself , he
uncovered to the dead , and then he cried to us ,  ' On ! to Moscow ! '  ' To
Moscow ! ' answered the army . 

 " We took Moscow . Would you believe it ? the Russians burned their own
city !  ' Twas a haystack six miles square , and it blazed for two days . The
buildings crashed like slates , and showers of melted iron and lead
rained down upon us , which was naturally horrible . I may say to you
plainly , it was like a flash of lightning on our disasters . The Emperor
said ,  ' We have done enough; my soldiers shall rest here . ' So we rested
awhile , just to get the breath into our bodies and the flesh on our
bones , for we were really tired . We took possession of the golden cross
that was on the Kremlin; and every soldier brought away with him a small
fortune . But out there the winter sets in a month earlier--a thing those
fools of science didn ' t properly explain . So , coming back , the cold
nipped us . No longer an army--do you hear me ? --no longer any generals , 
no longer any sergeants even .  ' Twas the reign of wretchedness and
hunger--a reign of equality at last . No one thought of anything but to
see France once more; no one stooped to pick up his gun or his money if
he dropped them; each man followed his nose , and went as he pleased
without caring for glory . The weather was so bad the Emperor couldn ' t
see his star; there was something between him and the skies . Poor man ! 
it made him ill to see his eagles flying away from victory . Ah !  ' twas a
mortal blow , you may believe me . 

 " Well , we got to the Beresina , My friends , I can affirm to you by all
that is most sacred , by my honour , that since mankind came into the
world , never , never was there seen such a fricassee of any army--guns , 
carriages , artillery-waggons--in the midst of such snows , under such
relentless skies ! The muzzles of the muskets burned our hands if we
touched them , the iron was so cold . It was there that the army was saved
by the pontoniers , who were firm at their post; and there that
Gondrin--sole survivor of the men who were bold enough to go into the
water and build the bridges by which the army crossed--that Gondrin , 
here present , admirably conducted himself , and saved us from the
Russians , who , I must tell you , still respected the grand army , 
remembering its victories . And , " he added , pointing to Gondrin , who was
gazing at him with the peculiar attention of a deaf man ,  " Gondrin is a
finished soldier , a soldier who is honour itself , and he merits your
highest esteem . 

 " I saw the Emperor , " he resumed ,  " standing by the bridge , motionless , 
not feeling the cold--was that human ? He looked at the destruction of
his treasure , his friends , his old Egyptians . Bah ! all that passed him , 
women , army-waggons , artillery , all were shattered , destroyed , ruined . 
The bravest carried the eagles; for the eagles , d ' ye see , were France , 
the nation , all of you ! they were the civil and the military honour that
must be kept pure; could their heads be lowered because of the cold ? It
was only near the Emperor that we warmed ourselves , because when he was
in danger we ran , frozen as we were--we , who wouldn ' t have stretched a
hand to save a friend . They told us he wept at night over his poor
family of soldiers . Ah ! none but he and Frenchmen could have got
themselves out of that business . We did get out , but with losses , great
losses , as I tell you . The Allies captured our provisions . Men began to
betray him , as the Red Man predicted . Those chatterers in Paris , who had
held their tongues after the Imperial Guard was formed , now thought he
was dead; so they hoodwinked the prefect of police , and hatched a
conspiracy to overthrow the empire . He heard of it; it worried him . He
left us , saying :  ' Adieu , my children; guard the outposts; I shall return
to you , ' Bah ! without him nothing went right; the generals lost their
heads , the marshals talked nonsense and committed follies; but that was
not surprising , for Napoleon , who was kind , had fed  ' em on gold; they
had got as fat as lard , and wouldn ' t stir; some stayed in camp when they
ought to have been warming the backs of the enemy who was between us and
France . 

 " But the Emperor came back , and he brought recruits , famous recruits; he
changed their backbone and made  ' em dogs of war , fit to set their teeth
into anything; and he brought a guard of honour , a fine body
indeed ! --all bourgeois , who melted away like butter on a gridiron . 

 " Well , spite of our stern bearing , here ' s everything going against us;
and yet the army did prodigies of valour . Then came battles on the
mountains , nations against nations--Dresden , Lützen , Bautzen . Remember
these days , all of you , for  ' twas then that Frenchmen were so
particularly heroic that a good grenadier only lasted six months . We
triumphed always; yet there were those English , in our rear , rousing
revolts against us with their lies ! No matter , we cut our way home
through the whole pack of the nations . Wherever the Emperor showed
himself we followed him; for if , by sea or land , he gave us the word
 ' Go ! ' we went . At last , we were in France; and many a poor foot-soldier
felt the air of his own country restore his soul to satisfaction , spite
of the wintry weather . I can say for myself that it refreshed my life . 
Well , next , our business was to defend France , our country , our
beautiful France , against , all Europe , which resented our having laid
down the law to the Russians , and pushed them back into their dens so
that they couldn ' t eat us up alive , as northern nations , who are dainty
and like southern flesh , have a habit of doing--at least , so I ' ve heard
some generals say . Then the Emperor saw his own father-in-law , his
friends whom he had made kings , and the scoundrels to whom he had given
back their thrones , all against him . Even Frenchmen , and allies in our
own ranks , turned against us under secret orders , as at the battle of
Leipsic . Would common soldiers have been capable of such wickedness ? 
Three times a day men were false to their word--and they called
themselves princes ! 

 " So , then , France was invaded . Wherever the Emperor showed his lion
face , the enemy retreated; and he did more prodigies in defending France
than ever he had done in conquering Italy , the East , Spain , Europe , and
Russia . He meant to bury every invader under the sod , and teach  ' em to
respect the soil of France . So he let them get to Paris , that he might
swallow them at a mouthful , and rise to the height of his genius in a
battle greater than all the rest--a mother-battle , as  ' twere . But there , 
there ! the Parisians were afraid for their twopenny skins , and their
trumpery shops; they opened the gates . Then the Ragusades began , and
happiness ended . The Empress was fooled , and the white banner flaunted
from the windows . The generals whom he had made his nearest friends
abandoned him for the Bourbons--a set of people no one had heard tell
of . The Emperor bade us farewell at Fontainebleau :  ' Soldiers ! ' --I can
hear him now; we wept like children; the flags and the eagles were
lowered as if for a funeral : it was , I may well say it to you , it was
the funeral of the Empire; her dapper armies were nothing now but
skeletons . So he said to us , standing there on the portico of his
palace :  ' My soldiers ! we are vanquished by treachery; but we shall meet
in heaven , the country of the brave . Defend my child , whom I commit to
you . Long live Napoleon II ! ' He meant to die , that no man should look
upon Napoleon vanquished; he took poison , enough to have killed a
regiment , because , like Jesus Christ before his Passion , he thought
himself abandoned of God and his talisman . But the poison did not hurt
him . 

 " See again ! he found he was immortal . 

 " Sure of himself , knowing he must ever be THE EMPEROR , he went for a
while to an island to study out the nature of these others , who , you may
be sure , committed follies without end . Whilst he bided his time down
there , the Chinese , and the wild men on the coast of Africa , and the
Barbary States , and others who are not at all accommodating , know so
well he was more than man that they respected his tent , saying to touch
it would be to offend God . Thus , d ' ye see , when these others turned him
from the doors of his own France , he still reigned over the whole world . 
Before long he embarked in the same little cockleshell of a boat he had
had in Egypt , sailed round the beard of the English , set foot in France , 
and France acclaimed him . The sacred cuckoo flew from spire to spire;
all France cried out with one voice ,  ' LONG LIVE THE EMPEROR ! ' In this
region , here , the enthusiasm for that wonder of the ages was , I may say , 
solid . Dauphine behaved well; and I am particularly pleased to know that
her people wept when they saw , once more , the gray top-coat . March first
it was , when Napoleon landed with two hundred men to conquer that
kingdom of France and of Navarre , which , on the twentieth of the same
month was again the French Empire . On that day our MAN was in Paris; he
had made a clean sweep , recovered his dear France , and gathered his
veterans together by saying no more than three words ,  ' I am here . ' 

 " ' Twas the greatest miracle God had yet done ! Before _him_ , did ever man
recover an empire by showing his hat ? And these others , who thought
they had subdued France ! Not they ! At sight of the eagles , a national
army sprang up , and we marched to Waterloo . There , the Guard died at one
blow . Napoleon , in despair , threw himself three times before the cannon
of the enemy without obtaining death . We saw that . The battle was lost . 
That night the Emperor called his old soldiers to him; on the field
soaked with our blood he burned his banners and his eagles--his poor
eagles , ever victorious , who cried  ' Forward ' in the battles , and had
flown the length and breadth of Europe , _they_ were saved the infamy of
belonging to the enemy : all the treasures of England couldn ' t get her a
tail-feather of them . No more eagles--the rest is well known . The Red
Man went over to the Bourbons , like the scoundrel that he is . France is
crushed; the soldier is nothing; they deprive him of his dues; they
discharge him to make room for broken-down nobles--ah ,  ' tis pitiable ! 
They seized Napoleon by treachery; the English nailed him on a desert
island in mid-ocean on a rock raised ten thousand feet above the earth;
and there he is , and will be , till the Red Man gives him back his power
for the happiness of France . These others say he ' s dead . Ha , dead !  ' Tis
easy to see they don ' t know Him . They tell that fib to catch the people , 
and feel safe in their hovel of a government . Listen ! the truth at the
bottom of it all is that his friends have left him alone on the desert
isle to fulfil a prophecy , for I forgot to say that his name , Napoleon , 
means  ' lion of the desert . ' Now this that I tell you is true as the
Gospel . All other tales that you hear about the Emperor are follies
without common-sense; because , d ' ye see , God never gave to child of
woman born the right to stamp his name in red as _he_ did , on the earth , 
which forever shall remember him ! Long live Napoleon , the father of his
people and of the soldier ! " ﻿
