There was once upon a time a child who had Good Luck for his godfather . 

 " I am not Fortune , " said Good Luck to the parents;  " I have no gifts to
bestow , but whenever he needs help I will be at hand . " 

 " Nothing could be better , " said the old couple . They were delighted . 
But what pleases the father often fails to satisfy the son : moreover , 
every man thinks that he deserves just a little more than he has got , 
and does not reckon it to the purpose if his father had less . 

Many a one would be thankful to have as good reasons for contentment
as he who had Good Luck for his godfather . 

If he fell , Good Luck popped something soft in the way to break his
fall; if he fought , Good Luck directed his blows , or tripped up his
adversary; if he got into a scrape , Good Luck helped him out of it;
and if ever Misfortune met him , Good Luck contrived to hustle her on
the pathway till his godson got safely by . 

In games of hazard the godfather played over his shoulder . In matters
of choice he chose for him . And when the lad began to work on his
father ' s farm the farmer began to get rich . For no bird or field-mouse
touched a seed that his son had sown , and every plant he planted
throve when Good Luck smiled on it . 

The boy was not fond of work , but when he did go into the fields , Good
Luck followed him . 

 " Your christening-day was a blessed day for us all , " said the old
farmer . 

 " He has never given me so much as a lucky sixpence , " muttered Good
Luck ' s godson . 

 " I am not Fortune--I make no presents , " said the godfather . 

When we are discontented it is oftener to please our neighbours than
ourselves . It was because the other boys had said-- " Simon , the
shoemaker ' s son , has an alderman for his godfather . He gave him a
silver spoon with the Apostle Peter for the handle; but thy godfather
is more powerful than any alderman " --that Good Luck ' s godson
complained ,  " He has never given me so much as a bent sixpence . " 

By and by the old farmer died , and his son grew up , and had the
largest farm in the country . The other boys grew up also , and as they
looked over the farmer ' s boundary-wall , they would say : 

 " Good-morning , Neighbour . That is certainly a fine farm of yours . Your
cattle thrive without loss . Your crops grow in the rain and are reaped
with the sunshine . Mischance never comes your road . What you have
worked for you enjoy . Such success would turn the heads of poor folk
like us . At the same time one would think a man need hardly work for
his living at all who has Good Luck for his godfather . " 

 " That is very true , " thought the farmer .  " Many a man is prosperous , 
and reaps what he sows , who had no more than the clerk and the sexton
for gossips at his christening . " 

 " What is the matter , Godson ? " asked Good Luck , who was with him in the
field . 

 " I want to be rich , " said the farmer . 

 " You will not have to wait long , " replied the godfather .  " In every
field you sow , in every flock you rear there is increase without
abatement . Your wealth is already tenfold greater than your father ' s . " 

 " Aye , aye , " replied the farmer .  " Good wages for good work . But many a
young man has gold at his command who need never turn a sod , and none
of the Good People came to _his_ christening . Fortunatus ' s Purse now , 
or even a sack or two of gold-- " 

 " Peace ! " cried the godfather;  " I have said that I give no gifts . " 

Though he had not Fortunatus ' s Purse , the farmer had now money and to
spare , and when the harvest was gathered in , he bought a fine suit of
clothes , and took his best horse and went to the royal city to see the
sights . 

The pomp and splendour , the festivities and fine clothes dazzled him . 

 " This is a gay life which these young courtiers lead , " said he .  " A man
has nothing to do but to enjoy himself . " 

 " If he has plenty of gold in his pocket , " said a bystander . 

By and by the Princess passed in her carriage . She was the King ' s only
daughter . She had hair made of sunshine , and her eyes were stars . 

 " What an exquisite creature ! " cried the farmer .  " What would not one
give to possess her ? " 

 " She has as many suitors as hairs on her head , " replied the bystander . 
 " She wants to marry the Prince of Moonshine , but he only dresses in
silver , and the King thinks he might find a richer son-in-law . The
Princess will go to the highest bidder . " 

 " And I have Good Luck for my godfather , and am not even at court ! " 
cried the farmer; and he put spurs to his horse , and rode home . 

Good Luck was taking care of the farm . 

 " Listen , Godfather ! " cried the young man .  " I am in love with the
King ' s daughter , and want her to wife . " 

 " It is not an easy matter , " replied Good Luck ,  " but I will do what I
can for you . Say that by good luck you saved the Princess ' s life , or
perhaps better the King ' s--for they say he is selfish-- " 

 " Tush ! " cried the farmer .  " The King is covetous , and wants a rich
son-in-law . " 

 " A wise man may bring wealth to a kingdom with his head , if not with
his hands , " said Good Luck ,  " and I can show you a district where the
earth only wants mining to be flooded with wealth . Besides , there are
a thousand opportunities that can be turned to account and influence . 
By wits and work , and with Good Luck to help him , many a poorer man
than you has risen to greatness . " 

 " Wits and work ! " cried the indignant godson .  " You speak well--truly ! A
hillman would have made a better godfather . Give me as much gold as
will fill three meal-bins , and you may keep the rest of your help for
those who want it . " 

Now at this moment by Good Luck stood Dame Fortune . She likes handsome
young men , and there was some little jealousy between her and the
godfather so she smiled at the quarrel . 

 " You would rather have had me for your gossip ? " said she . 

 " If you would give me three wishes , I would , " replied the farmer
boldly ,  " and I would trouble you no more . " 

 " Will you make him over to me ? " said Dame Fortune to the godfather . 

 " If he wishes it , " replied Good Luck .  " But if he accepts your gifts he
has no further claim on me . " 

 " Nor on me either , " said the Dame .  " Hark ye , young man , you mortals
are apt to make a hobble of your three wishes , and you may end with a
sausage at your nose , like your betters . " 

 " I have thought of it too often , " replied the farmer ,  " and I know what
I want . For my first wish I desire imperishable beauty . " 

 " It is yours , " said Dame Fortune , smiling as she looked at him . 

 " The face of a prince and the manners of a clown are poor partners , " 
said the farmer .  " My second wish is for suitable learning and courtly
manners , which cannot be gained at the plough-tail . " 

 " You have them in perfection , " said the Dame , as the young man thanked
her by a graceful bow . 

 " Thirdly , " said he ,  " I demand a store of gold that I can never
exhaust . " 

 " I will lead you to it , " said Dame Fortune; and the young man was so
eager to follow her that he did not even look back to bid farewell to
his godfather . 

He was soon at court . He lived in the utmost pomp . He had a suit of
armour made for himself out of beaten gold . No metal less precious
might come near his person , except for the blade of his sword . This
was obliged to be made of steel , for gold is not always strong enough
to defend one ' s life or his honour . But the Princess still loved the
Prince of Moonshine . 

 " Stuff and nonsense ! " said the King .  " I shall give you to the Prince
of Gold . " 

 " I wish I had the good luck to please her , " muttered the young Prince . 
But he had not , for all his beauty and his wealth . However , she was to
marry him , and that was something . 

The preparations for the wedding were magnificent . 

 " It is a great expense , " sighed the King ,  " but then I get the Prince
of Gold for a son-in-law . " 

The Prince and his bride drove round the city in a triumphal
procession . Her hair fell over her like sunshine , but the starlight of
her eyes was cold . 

In the train rode the Prince of Moonshine , dressed in silver , and
with no colour in his face . 

As the bridal chariot approached one of the city gates , two black
ravens hovered over it , and then flew away , and settled on a tree . 

Good Luck was sitting under the tree to see his godson ' s triumph , and
he heard the birds talking above him . 

 " Has the Prince of Gold no friend who can tell him that there is a
loose stone above the archway that is tottering to fall ? " said they . 
And Good Luck covered his face with his mantle as the Prince drove
through . 

Just as they were passing out of the gateway the stone fell on to the
Prince ' s head . He wore a casque of pure gold , but his neck was broken . 

  " We can ' t have all this expense for nothing , " said the King : 
 so he married his daughter to the Prince of Moonshine . If one
 can ' t get gold one must be content with silver . 

 " Will you come to the funeral ? " asked Dame Fortune of the godfather . 

 " Not I , " replied Good Luck .  " I had no hand in _this_ matter . " 

The rain came down in torrents . The black feathers on the ravens ' 
backs looked as if they had been oiled . 

 " Caw ! caw ! " said they .  " It was an unlucky end . " 

However , the funeral was a very magnificent one , for there was no
stint of gold . 


