A powerful and wealthy king , having lost his wife , was so
inconsolable , that he shut himself up for eight entire days , in a
little cabinet , where he spent his time in knocking his head against
the wall , until the courtiers were afraid he would kill himself ! They
accordingly placed stuffed mattresses over every wall , and allowed all
his subjects , who desired , to pay him a visit , trusting that something
would be said to alleviate his grief . But neither grave nor lively
discourse made any impression upon him ; he scarcely heard what was
spoken . At last there presented herself before him a lady , covered
from head to foot in a long crape veil , who wept and sobbed so much
that the king noticed her . She told him that she did not come , like
the rest , to console him , but rather to encourage his grief . She
herself had lost the best of husbands , and here she began to weep so
profusely , that it was a wonder her eyes were not melted out of her
head . The king began to weep in company , and to talk to her of his
dear wife--she did the same of her dear husband : in fact they talked
so much , that they talked their sorrow quite away . Then , lifting up
her veil , she showed lovely blue eyes and dark eyelashes . The king
noticed her more and more--he spoke less and less of the departed
queen ; by and by he ceased to speak of her at all . The end was , that
he courted the inconsolable lady in the black veil , and married her . 

By his first marriage he had one daughter , called Florina , or the
little Flora , because she was so fresh and lovely ; at the time of his
second marriage she was quite fifteen years old . The new queen also
had a daughter , who was being brought up by her godmother , the fairy
Soussio--her name was Troutina , because her complexion was all spotted
like a trout ' s back . Indeed , she was altogether ugly and disagreeable ; 
and when contrasted with Florina , the difference between the two made
the mother so envious , that she and Troutina spared no pains to make
the princess ' s life unhappy , and to speak ill of her to her father . 

One day the king observed that both girls were now old enough to be
married , and that he intended to choose for one of them the first
prince who visited his court . 

 " Be it so , " said the queen ;  " and as my daughter is older , handsomer , 
and more amiable than yours , she shall have the first choice . " The
king disputed nothing ; indeed , he never did--the queen ruled him in
all things . 

Some time after , news came that King Charming would shortly arrive , 
and that he was as charming as his name . When the queen heard this
news , she sent for milliners , dressmakers , jewellers , and decked
Troutina from head to foot ; but to Florina she allowed not a single
new frock The poor princess had to put on her old one , which was very
old and shabby indeed , she was so much ashamed of it , that she hid
herself in a corner of the saloon , lest King Charming should see her . 
But he did not , being overwhelmed with the ceremonious reception given
him by the queen , who presented to him Troutina , all blazing with
jewels , yet so ugly that King Charming involuntarily turned away his
eyes . 

 " But , madam , is there not another princess called Florina ? " 

They pointed to the corner where Florina was hidden , and she came out , 
blushing so much , that the young king was dazzled with her beauty , in
spite of her shabby gown . He rose , and made her a profound reverence , 
paying her besides so many elegant compliments , that the queen became
very much displeased . King Charming took no heed , but conversed with
Florina for three hours without stopping . Indeed , his admiration of
her was so plain , that the queen and Troutina begged of the king that
she might be shut up in a tower during the whole time of his visit ; 
so , as soon as she had returned to her apartment , four men in masks
entered , and carried her off , leaving her in a dark cell , and in the
utmost desolation . 

Meantime King Charming eagerly awaited her re-appearance , but he saw
her no more ; and by the queen ' s orders , every one about him spoke all
the evil they could of poor Florina , but he refused to believe one
word .  " No , " said he ,  " nature could not have united a base nature to
such a sweet innocent face . I will rather suppose that she is
maligned by her stepmother and by Troutina , who is so ugly herself
that no wonder she bears envy towards the fairest woman in the world . " 

Meanwhile Florina , shut up in her tower , lamented bitterly .  " Ah , would
I had been sent here before I saw this amiable prince , who was so kind
to me ! It is to prevent my meeting him again , that the queen treats me
so cruelly . Alas ! the little beauty I have has cost me sore ! " 

The queen , to win King Charming for her daughter , made him many
presents ; among the rest an order of knighthood , a golden heart , 
enamelled in flame-colour , surrounded with many arrows , but pierced by
one only , the motto being ,  " _She alone_ . " The heart was made of a
single ruby , as big as an ostrich ' s egg . Each arrow was a diamond , a
finger ' s length , and the chain was of pearls , each weighing a pound . 
When the young king received this very handsome present , he was much
perplexed , until they told him it came from the princess whom he had
lately seen , and who requested him to be her knight . 

 " Florina ! " cried he , enchanted . 

 " No , Troutina . " 

 " Then I am sorry I cannot accept the honour , " replied King Charming . 
 " A monarch is surely at liberty to form his own engagements . I know
what is a knight ' s duty to his lady , and should wish to fulfil it ; as
I cannot fulfil it to Troutina , I would rather decline the favour she
offers me than become unworthy of it . " 

Civil as this answer was , it irritated the queen and her daughter
exceedingly ; and when , since in all his audiences with their majesties
he never saw Florina , he at last inquired where the younger princess
was , the queen answered fiercely , that she was shut up in prison , and
would remain there till Troutina was married . 

 " And for what reason ? " asked King Charming . 

 " I do not know ; and if I did , I would not tell you , " replied the
queen , more angrily than ever ; so that King Charming quitted her
presence as soon as ever he could . 

When he was alone , he sent for one of his attendants , whom he trusted
very much , and begged him to gain information from some court lady
about the princess Florina . This scheme succeeded so well , that
Florina was persuaded to promise she would speak to him for a few
moments next night , from a small window at the bottom of the tower . 
But the faithless lady-in-waiting betrayed her to the queen , who
locked her up in her chamber , and determined to send her own daughter
to the window instead . The night was so dark that King Charming never
found out the difference , but made to Troutina all the tender speeches
that he meant for Florina , offering her his crown and his heart , and
ending by placing his own ring on her finger , as a pledge of eternal
fidelity . He also made her agree to fly with him next night , in a
chariot drawn by winged frogs , of which a great magician , one of his
friends , had made him a present . He thought she talked very little , 
and that little not in quite so pleasant a voice as formerly ; still , 
he was too much in love to notice much , and departed very joyful in
having obtained her promise . 

Next night Troutina , thickly veiled , quitted the palace by a secret
door . King Charming met her , received her in his arms , and vowed to
love her for ever . Then he lifted her into the fairy chariot , and they
sailed about in the air for some hours . But as he was not likely to
wish to sail about for ever , he at last proposed that they should
descend to earth , and be married . Troutina agreed with all her heart , 
but wished that the ceremony should be performed at her godmother ' s , 
the fairy Soussio . So they entered together into the fairy-palace , and
she told her godmother privately how all had happened , and how she had
won King Charming , begging the fairy to pacify him when he found out
his mistake . 

 " My child , " replied the godmother ,  " that is more easily said than
done ; he is too deeply in love with Florina . " 

Meantime the king was left waiting in a chamber with diamond walls , so
thin and transparent , that through them he saw Troutina and Soussio
conversing together . He stood like a man in a dream :  " What ! am I
betrayed ? Has this enemy to my peace carried away my dear Florina ? " 

How great was his despair , when Soussio said to him in a commanding
voice ,  " King Charming , behold the princess Troutina , to whom you have
promised your faith : marry her immediately ! " 

 " Do you think me a fool ? " cried the king ;  " I have promised her
nothing . She is-- " 

 " Stop--if you show me any disrespect-- " 

 " I will respect you as much as a fairy deserves to be respected , if
you will only give me back my princess . " 

 " Am not I she ? " said Troutina .  " It was to me you gave this ring ; to me
you spoke at the window . " 

 " I have been wickedly deceived ! " cried the king ;  " come , my winged
frogs , we will depart immediately . " 

 " You cannot , " said Soussio ; and , touching him , he found himself fixed
as if his feet were glued to the pavement . 

 " You may turn me into stone ! " exclaimed he ;  " but I will love no one , 
except Florina . " 

Soussio employed persuasions , threats , promises , entreaties . Troutina
wept , groaned , shrieked , and then tried quiet sulkiness ; but the king
uttered not a word . For twenty days and twenty nights he stood there , 
without sleeping , or eating , or once sitting down--they talking all
the while . 

At length , Soussio , quite worn out , said ,  " Choose seven years of
penitence and punishment , or marry my goddaughter . " 

 " I choose , " answered the king ;  " and I will not marry your
goddaughter . " 

 " Then fly out of this window , in the shape of a Blue Bird . " 

Immediately the king ' s figure changed . His arms formed themselves into
wings ; his legs and feet turned black and thin , and claws grew upon
them ; his body wasted into the slender shape of a bird , and was
covered with bright blue feathers ; his eyes became round and beady ; 
his nose an ivory beak ; and his crown was a white plume on the top of
his head . He began to speak in a singing voice , and then uttering a
doleful cry , fled away as far as possible from the fatal palace of
Soussio . 

But , though he looked only a blue bird , the king was his own natural
self still , and remembered all his misfortunes , and did not cease to
lament for his beautiful Florina . Flying from tree to tree , he sang
melancholy songs about her and himself , and wished he were dead many a
time . 

The fairy Soussio sent back Troutina to her mother , who was furious . 
 " Florina shall repent having pleased King Charming ! " cried she ; and
dressing her own daughter in rich garments , with a gold crown on her
head , and King Charming ' s ring on her finger , she took her to the
tower .  " Florina , your sister is come to see and bring you marriage
presents , for she is now the wife of King Charming . " 

Florina , doubting no more her lover ' s loss , fell down in a swoon , and
the queen immediately went to tell her father that she was mad for
love , and must be watched closely lest she should in some way disgrace
herself . The king said , her stepmother might do with her exactly what
she pleased . 

When the princess recovered from her swoon , she began to weep , and
wept all night long , sitting at the open window of her tower . The Blue
Bird , who kept continually flying about the palace , but only at night
time , lest any one should see him , happened to come and perch upon a
tall cypress opposite the window , and heard her ; but it was too dark
to see who she was , and at daylight she shut the window . Next night , 
it was broad moonlight , and then he saw clearly the figure of a young
girl , weeping sore , and knew that it was his beloved Florina . 

When she paused in her lamentations ,  " Adorable princess , " said he , 
 " why do you mourn ? Your troubles are not without remedy . " 

 " Who speaks to me so gently ? " asked she . 

 " A king , who loves you , and will never love any other . " 

So saying he flew up to the window , and at first frightened the
princess very much , for she could not understand such an extraordinary
thing as a bird who talked in words like a man , yet kept still the
piping voice of a nightingale . But soon she began stroking his
beautiful plumage , and caressing him . 

 " Who are you , charming bird ? " 

 " You have spoken my name . I am King Charming , condemned to be a bird
for seven years , because I will not renounce you . " 

 " Ah ! do not deceive me . I know you have married Troutina . She came to
visit me with your diamonds on her neck , and your ring on her finger , 
wearing the golden crown and royal mantle which you had given her , 
while I was laden with iron chains . " 

 " It is all false , " sang the Blue Bird , and told her his whole story , 
which comforted her so much that she thought no more of her
misfortunes . They conversed till daybreak , and promised faithfully
every night to meet again thus . 

Meantime the princess could not sleep for thinking of her Blue Bird . 
 " Suppose sportsmen should shoot him , or eagles and kites attack him , 
and vultures devour him just as if he were a mere bird and not a great
king ? What should I do if I saw his poor feathers scattered on the
ground , and knew that he was no more ? " So she grieved all day long . 

The beautiful Blue Bird , hid in a hollow tree , spent the hours in
thinking of his princess .  " How happy I am to have found her again , and
found her so engaging and so sweet . " And as he wished to pay her all
the attentions that a lover delights in , he flew to his own kingdom , 
entered his palace by an open window , and sought for some diamond
ear-rings , which he brought back in his beak , and , when night came , 
offered them to Florina . So night after night he brought her something
beautiful , and they talked together till day , when he flew back to the
hollow tree , where he sang her praises in a voice so sweet that the
passers-by thought it was not a bird but a spirit . Rumours went about
that the place was haunted , and no one would go near the spot . Thus , 
for two years , Florina spent her time , and never once regretted her
captivity . Her Blue Bird visited her every night , and they loved one
another dearly . And though she saw nobody and he lived in the hollow
of a tree , they always found plenty to say to one another . 

The malicious queen tried with all her might to get Troutina married , 
but in vain . Nobody would have her .  " If it were Florina , now , " said
the kings , or the kings ' ambassadors ,  " we should be most happy to sign
the contract . " 

 " That girl thwarts us still , " said the queen .  " She must have some
secret correspondence with foreign suitors . But we will find her out
and punish her . " 

The mother and daughter finished talking so late that it was midnight
before they reached Florina ' s apartment . She had dressed herself as
usual , with the utmost care , to please her Blue Bird , who liked to see
her lovely ; and she had adorned herself with all the pretty things he
had given her . He perched on the window-sill , and she sat at the
window , and they were singing together a duet , which the queen heard
outside . She burst the door open , and rushed into the chamber . 

The first thing Florina did was to open her little window that the
Blue Bird might fly away . But he would not . He had seen the queen and
Troutina , and though he could not defend his princess , he refused to
leave her . The two rushed upon her like furies . Her wonderful beauty
and her splendid jewels startled them .  " Whence came all these
ornaments ? " cried they . 

 " I found them , " replied Florina , and refused to answer more . 

 " Some one has given them to you that you might join in treason
against your father and the kingdom . 

 " Am I likely to do this ? I , a poor princess , kept in captivity for two
years , with you as my gaoler ? " 

 " In captivity , " repeated the queen .  " Why , then , do you dress yourself
so fine , and adorn your chamber with flowers ? " 

 " I have leisure enough : I may just as well spend some of it in
adorning myself , instead of bemoaning my misfortune--innocent as I
am . " 

 " Innocent , indeed ! " cried the queen , and began to search the room . In
it she found all King Charming ' s presents--diamonds , rubies , emeralds , 
amethysts--in short , jewels without end . Meantime , from the window the
Blue Bird , who had the eye of a lynx , sang aloud ,  " Beware , Florina ! " 

 " You see , madam , " said Florina ,  " even the spirits of the air take pity
upon me . " 

 " I see that you are in league with demons ; but your father shall judge
you ; " and , very much frightened , the queen left her , and went to hold
counsel with Troutina as to what was to be done . They agreed to put in
Florina ' s chamber a waiting-maid , who should watch her from morning
till night . When the princess learnt this she was in great grief . 

 " Alas ! " cried she ,  " I can no longer talk with my bird who loved me so ; 
and our love was consolation for all our misfortunes . What will he do ? 
What shall I do ? " And she melted into floods of tears . 

She dared not open the window , though she heard continually his wings
fluttering round it . For more than a month she waited ; but the
serving-maid watched her night and day . At last , overcome with
weariness , the girl fell asleep , and then Florina opened her little
window , and sang in a low voice--

  " Blue Bird , Blue Bird , 
 Come to my side . " 

The Blue Bird flew to the window-sill , and they lavished on one
another a hundred caresses , and talked together till dawn . Next night
it happened the same , till they began to hope that the waiting-maid , 
who seemed to enjoy her sleep so much , would sleep every night to
come . But on the third night , hearing a noise , she wakened , and saw by
the light of the moon the Princess Florina sitting at the window with
a beautiful Blue Bird , who warbled in her ear and touched her gently
with his beak . The spy listened and heard all their conversation , very
much astonished that a princess could be so fond of a mere bird . When
day came she related all to the queen and Troutina , who concluded that
the bird could be no other than King Charming . They sent the girl
back , told her to express no curiosity , but to feign sleep , and to go
to bed earlier than usual . Then the poor deceived princess opened her
little window , and sang her usual song--

  " Blue Bird , Blue Bird , 
 Come to my side . " 

But no Blue Bird appeared . The queen had caused sharp knives to be
hung outside the hollow of the tree : he flew against them and cut his
feet and wings , till he dropped down , covered with blood . 

 " Oh , Florina , come to my help ! " sighed he ,  " But she is dead , I know , 
and I will die also . " 

At that moment , his friend , the magician , who since he had seen the
chariot with flying frogs return without King Charming , had gone eight
times round the world in search of him , made his ninth journey , and
came to the tree where the poor Blue Bird lay , calling out ,  " King
Charming , King Charming ! " 

The king recognised the voice of his best friend : whereupon the
magician took him out of the hollow tree , healed his wounds , and heard
all his history . He persuaded King Charming that , overcome with fear
and cruel treatment , Florina must have betrayed him . 

 " Then do as you will with me ! " cried the king .  " Put me into a cage and
take me back with you . I shall at least be safe there for the five
years that are to be endured . " 

 " But , " said the enchanter ,  " can you remain five years in so
undignified a position ? And you have enemies who will assuredly seize
on your kingdom . " 

 " Why can I not return and govern it as before ? " 

 " I fear , " replied his friend ,  " that the thing is difficult . Who would
obey a Blue Bird ? " 

 " Ah , that is too true ! " cried the king , sadly ,  " People only judge by
the outside . " 

Meantime Florina , overcome with grief , fell dangerously sick , and in
her sickness she kept singing , day and night , her little song--

  " Blue Bird , Blue Bird , 
 Come to my side . " 

But no one regarded her . 

At last a sudden change took place in her fortunes . The king her
father died , and the people , who knew she was his heir , began to
inquire , with one accord , where was the Princess Florina ? They
assailed the palace in crowds , demanding her for their sovereign . The
riot became so dangerous that Troutina and her mother fled away to the
fairy Soussio . Then the populace stormed the tower , rescued the sick
and almost dying princess , and crowned her as their queen . 

The exceeding care that was taken of her , and her longing to live in
order to see again her Blue Bird , restored Florina ' s health , and gave
her strength to call a council and arrange all the affairs of her
kingdom . Then she departed by night , and alone , to go over the world
in search of her Blue Bird . 

The magician , who was King Charming ' s friend , went to the fairy
Soussio , whom he knew , for they had quarrelled and made it up again , 
as fairies and magicians do , many times within the last five or six
hundred years . She received him civilly , and asked him what he wanted . 
He tried to make a bargain with her but could effect nothing , unless
King Charming would consent to marry Troutina . The enchanter found
this bride so ugly that he could not advise . Still , the Blue Bird had
run so many risks in his cage : the nail it was hung upon had broken , 
and the king suffered much in the fall ; Minetta , the cat , had glowered
at him with her green eyes ; the attendants had forgotten his hemp-seed
and his water-glass , so that he was half dying of hunger and thirst ; 
and a monkey had plucked at his feathers through the wires as
disrespectfully as if , instead of a king , he had been a linnet or a
jay . Worse than all , his next heir spread reports of his death , and
threatened to seize on his throne . 

Under these circumstances the magician thought it best to agree with
Soussio that King Charming should be restored to his kingdom and his
natural shape for six months , on condition that Troutina should remain
in his palace , and that he should try to like her and marry her . If
not , he was to become again a Blue Bird . So he found himself once more
King Charming , and as charming as ever ; but he would rather have been
a bird and near his beloved , than a king in the society of Troutina . 
The enchanter gave him the best reasons for what had been done , and
advised him to occupy himself with the affairs of his kingdom and
people ; but he thought less of these things than how to escape from
the horror of marrying Troutina . 

Meanwhile the Queen Florina , in a peasant ' s dress , with a straw hat on
her head , and a canvas sack on her shoulder , began her journey : 
sometimes on horseback , sometimes on foot , sometimes by sea , sometimes
by land , wandering ; evermore after her beloved King Charming . One
day , stopping beside a fountain , she let her hair fall loose , and
dipped her weary feet in the cool water , when an old woman , bent , and
leaning on a stick , came by . 

 " My pretty maiden , what are you doing here all alone ? " 

 " Good mother , " replied the queen ,  " I have too many troubles to be
pleasant company for anybody . " 

 " Tell me your troubles , and I may be able to soften them . " 

Florina obeyed , and told her whole history , and how she was travelling
over the world in search of the Blue Bird . The little woman listened
attentively , and then , in the twinkling of an eye , became , instead of
an old woman , a beautiful fairy . 

 " Incomparable Florina , the king you seek is no longer a bird ; my
sister Soussio has restored him to his proper shape , and he reigns in
his own kingdom . Do not afflict yourself ; happiness will yet be yours . 
Take these four eggs , and whenever you are in trouble , break them , and
see what ensues . " So saying , the fairy vanished . 

Florina , greatly comforted , put the eggs in her sack , and turned her
steps towards the country of King Charming . She walked eight days and
nights without stopping , and then came to a mountain made entirely of
ivory , and nearly perpendicular . Despairing of ever climbing it , she
sank down at the foot , prepared to die there , when she bethought
herself of the eggs .  " Let me see , " said she ,  " if the fairy has
deceived me or not . " So she broke one , and inside it were little
hooks of gold , which she fitted on her feet and hands , and by means of
which she climbed the mountain with ease . Arrived at the summit she
found new difficulties ; for the valley below was one large smooth
mirror , in which sixty thousand women stood admiring themselves . They
had need , for the charm of the mirror was that each saw herself
therein , not as she was , but as she wished to be ; and the grimaces
they made were enough to cause a person to die of laughter . Not one of
them had ever gained the top of the mountain ; and when they saw
Florina there , they all burst into angry outcries ,  " How has this woman
got up the hill ? If she descends upon our mirror her first footstep
will crack it into a thousand pieces . " 

The queen , uncertain what to do , broke the second egg , and there flew
out two pigeons harnessed to a fine chariot , in which Florina mounted , 
and descended lightly over the mirror to the valley ' s foot .  " Now , my
pretty pigeons , " said she ,  " will you convey me to the palace of King
Charming ? " The obedient pigeons did so , flying day and night till they
reached the city gates ; when the queen dismissed them with a sweet
kiss , which was worth more than her crown . 

How her heart beat as she entered , and begged to see the king !  " You ! " 
cried the servants mocking .  " Little peasant-girl , your eyes are not
half good enough to see the king . Besides , he is going to-morrow to
the temple with the Princess Troutina , whom he has at last agreed to
marry . " 

Florina sat down on a door-step , and hid her face under her straw hat
and her drooping hair .  " Alas ! " she cried ,  " my Blue Bird has forsaken
me . " 

She neither ate nor slept , but rose with the dawn , and pushed her way
through the guards to the temple , where she saw two thrones , one for
King Charming , and the other for Troutina . They arrived shortly ; he
more charming and she more repulsive than ever . Knitting her brows , 
Troutina exclaimed ,  " What creature is that who dares approach so near
my golden throne ? " 

 " I am a poor peasant-girl , " said Florina .  " I come from afar to sell
you curiosities . " And she took out of her sack the emerald bracelets
which the Blue Bird had given her . 

 " These are pretty trinkets , " said Troutina ; and going up to the king
she asked him what he thought of them . At sight of the ornaments he
turned pale , remembering those he had given to Florina . 

 " These bracelets are worth half my kingdom ; I did not think there had
been more than one pair in the world . " 

 " Then I will buy these , " said Troutina ; but Florina refused to sell
them for money : the price she asked was permission to sleep a night in
the Chamber of Echoes . 

 " As you will ; your bargains are cheap enough , " replied Troutina , 
laughing : and when she laughed she showed teeth like the tusks of a
wild boar . 

Now the king , when he was a Blue Bird , had informed Florina about this
Chamber of Echoes , where every word spoken could be heard in his own
chamber ; she could not have chosen a better way of reproaching him for
his infidelity . But vain were her sobs and complainings ; the king had
taken opium to lull his grief ; he slept soundly all night long . Next
day , Florina was in great disquietude . Could he have really heard her , 
and been indifferent to her sorrow ; or had he not heard her at all ? 
She determined to buy another night in the Chamber of Echoes ; but she
had no more jewels to tempt Troutina ; so she broke the third egg . Out
of it came a chariot of polished steel , inlaid with gold , drawn by six
green mice , the coachman being a rose-coloured rat , and the postilion
a grey one . Inside the carriage sat little puppets , who behaved
themselves just like live ladies and gentlemen . 

When Troutina went to walk in the palace garden , Florina awaited her
in a green alley , and made the mice gallop , and the ladies and
gentlemen bow , till the princess was delighted , and ready to buy the
curiosity at any price . Again Florina exacted permission to pass the
night in the Chamber of Echoes ; and again the king , undisturbed by her
lamentation , slept without waking till dawn . 

The third day , one of the palace valets , passing her by , said ,  " You
stupid peasant-girl , it is well the king takes opium every night , or
you would disturb him by that terrible sobbing of yours . " 

 " Does he so ? " said the queen , now comprehending all .  " Then if you will
promise to-night to keep the opium cup out of his way , these pearls
and diamonds , " and she took a handful of them from her sack ,  " shall
assuredly be yours . " 

The valet promised ; and then Florina broke her fourth egg , out of
which came a pie composed of birds , which , though they had been
plucked , baked , and made ready for the table , sang as beautifully as
birds that are alive . Troutina , charmed with this marvellous novelty , 
bought it at the same price as the rest , adding generously a small
piece of gold . 

When all the palace were asleep , Florina for the last time , hoping
King Charming would hear her , called upon him with all sorts of tender
expressions , reminding him of their former vows , and their two years
of happiness .  " What have I done to thee , that thou shouldst forget me
and marry Troutina ? " sobbed she ; and the king , who this time was wide
awake , heard her . He could not make out whose voice it was , or whence
it came , but it somehow reminded him of his dearest Florina , whom he
had never ceased to love . He called his valet , inquired who was
sleeping in the Chamber of Echoes , and heard that it was the little
peasant-girl who had sold to Troutina the emerald bracelet . Then he
rose up , dressed himself hastily , and went in search of her . She was
sitting mournfully on the floor , with her hair hiding her face , and
her eyes swollen with tears ; but he knew at once his faithful Florina . 
He fell on his knees before her covered her hands with kisses , and
they embraced and wept together . For what was the good of all their
love when they were still in the power of the fairy Soussio ? 

But at this moment appeared the friendly enchanter , with a fairy still
greater than Soussio , the one who had given Florina the four eggs . 
They declared that their united power was stronger than Soussio ' s , and
that the lovers should be married without further delay . 

When this news reached Troutina , she ran to the Chamber of Echoes , and
there beheld her beautiful rival , whom she had so cruelly afflicted . 
But the moment she opened her mouth to speak , her wicked tongue was
silenced for ever ; for the magician turned her into a trout , which he
flung out of the window into the stream that flowed through the castle
garden . 

As for King Charming and Queen Florina , delivered out of all their
sorrows , and given to one another , their joy was quite inexpressible , 
and it lasted to the end of their lives . 

 _Note . _--It will be seen that this tale , which is from the
 French , bears a curious resemblance to Grimm ' s story of  " The
 Iron Stove , " except that the latter retains a brevity and
 German simplicity , not found here . This family likeness may
 be traced in the fairy tales of all countries . I merely
 refer to it to show that the repetition of incidents was not
 unobserved or unintentional . --EDITOR . 


