Once upon a time there was a king and a queen who grieved sorely that
they had no children . When at last the queen gave birth to a daughter
the king was so overjoyed that he gave a great christening feast , the
like of which had never before been known . He asked all the fairies in
the land--there were seven all told--to stand godmothers to the little
princess , hoping that each might give her a gift , and so she should have
all imaginable perfections . 

After the christening , all the company returned to the palace , where a
great feast had been spread for the fairy godmothers . Before each was
set a magnificent plate , with a gold knife and a gold fork studded with
diamonds and rubies . Just as they were seating themselves , however , 
there entered an old fairy who had not been invited because more than
fifty years ago she had shut herself up in a tower and it was supposed
that she was either dead or enchanted . 

The king ordered a cover to be laid for her , but it could not be a
massive gold one like the others , for only seven had been ordered made . 
The old fairy thought herself ill-used and muttered between her teeth . 
One of the young fairies , overhearing her , and fancying she might work
some mischief to the little baby , went and hid herself behind the
hangings in the hall , so as to be able to have the last word and undo
any harm the old fairy might wish to work . The fairies now began to
endow the princess . The youngest , for her gift , decreed that she should
be the most beautiful person in the world; the next that she should have
the mind of an angel; the third that she should be perfectly graceful;
the fourth that she should dance admirably well; the fifth , that she
should sing like a nightingale; the sixth , that she should play
charmingly upon every musical instrument . The turn of the old fairy had
now come , and she declared , while her head shook with malice , that the
princess should pierce her hand with a spindle and die of the wound . 
This dreadful fate threw all the company into tears of dismay , when the
young fairy who had hidden herself came forward and said : 

 " Be of good cheer , king and queen; your daughter shall not so die . It is
true I cannot entirely undo what my elder has done . The princess will
pierce her hand with a spindle , but , instead of dying , she will only
fall into a deep sleep . The sleep will last a hundred years , and at the
end of that time a king ' s son will come to wake her . " 

The king , in hopes of preventing what the old fairy had foretold , 
immediately issued an edict by which he forbade all persons in his
dominion from spinning or even having spindles in their houses under
pain of instant death . 

Now fifteen years after the princess was born she was with the king and
queen at one of their castles , and as she was running about by herself
she came to a little chamber at the top of a tower , and there sat an
honest old woman spinning , for she had never heard of the king ' s edict . 

 " What are you doing ? " asked the princess . 

 " I am spinning , my fair child , " said the old woman , who did not know
her . 

 " How pretty it is ! " exclaimed the princess .  " How do you do it ? Give it
to me that I may see if I can do it . " She had no sooner taken up the
spindle , than , being hasty and careless , she pierced her hand with the
point of it , and fainted away . The old woman , in great alarm , called for
help . People came running in from all sides; they threw water in the
princess ' s face and did all they could to restore her , but nothing would
bring her to . The king , who had heard the noise and confusion , came up
also , and remembering what the fairy had said , he had the princess
carried to the finest apartment and laid upon a richly embroidered bed . 
She lay there in all her loveliness , for the swoon had not made her
pale; her lips were cherry-ripe and her cheeks ruddy and fair; her eyes
were closed , but they could hear her breathing quietly; she could not be
dead . The king looked sorrowfully upon her . He knew that she would not
awake for a hundred years . 

The good fairy who had saved her life and turned her death into sleep
was in the kingdom of Mataquin , twelve thousand leagues away , when this
happened , but she learned of it from a dwarf who had a pair of
seven-league boots , and instantly set out for the castle , where she
arrived in an hour , drawn by dragons in a fiery chariot . The king came
forward to receive her and showed his grief . The good fairy was very
wise and saw that the princess when she woke would find herself all
alone in that great castle and everything about her would be strange . So
this is what she did . She touched with her wand everybody that was in
the castle , except the king and queen . She touched the governesses , 
maids of honour , women of the bedchamber , gentlemen , officers , 
stewards , cooks , scullions , boys , guards , porters , pages , footmen; she
touched the horses in the stable with their grooms , the great mastiffs
in the court-yard , and even little Pouste , the tiny lap-dog of the
princess that was on the bed beside her . As soon as she had touched them
they all fell asleep , not to wake again until the time arrived for their
mistress to do so , when they would be ready to wait upon her . Even the
spits before the fire , laden with partridges and pheasants , went to
sleep , and the fire itself went to sleep also . 

It was the work of a moment . The king and queen kissed their daughter
farewell and left the castle , issuing a proclamation that no person
whatsoever was to approach it . That was needless , for in a quarter of an
hour there had grown up about it a wood so thick and filled with thorns
that nothing could get at the castle , and the castle top itself could
only be seen from a great distance . 

A hundred years went by , and the kingdom was in the hands of another
royal family . The son of the king was hunting one day when he discovered
the towers of the castle above the tops of the trees , and asked what
castle that was . All manner of answers were given to him . One said it
was an enchanted castle , another that witches lived there , but most
believed that it was occupied by a great ogre which carried thither all
the children he could catch and ate them up one at a time , for nobody
could get at him through the wood . The prince did not know what to
believe , when finally an old peasant said : 

 " Prince , it is more than fifty years since I heard my father say that
there was in that castle the most beautiful princess that ever was seen;
that she was to sleep for a hundred years , and to be awakened at last by
the king ' s son , who was to marry her . " 

The young prince at these words felt himself on fire . He had not a
moment ' s doubt that he was destined to this great adventure , and full of
ardour he determined at once to set out for the castle . Scarcely had he
come to the wood when all the trees and thorns which had made such an
impenetrable thicket opened on one side and the other to offer him a
path . He walked toward the castle , which appeared now at the end of a
long avenue , but when he turned to , look for his followers not one was
to be seen; the woods had closed instantly upon him as he had passed
through . He was entirely alone , and utter silence was about him . He
entered a large forecourt and stood still with amazement and awe . On
every side were stretched the bodies of men and animals apparently
lifeless . But the faces of the men were rosy , and the goblets by them
had a few drops of wine left . The men had plainly fallen asleep . His
steps resounded as he passed over the marble pavement and up the marble
staircase . He entered the guard-room; there the guards stood drawn up in
line with carbines at their shoulders , but they were sound asleep . He
passed through one apartment after another , where were ladies and
gentlemen asleep in their chairs or standing . He entered a chamber
covered with gold , and saw on a bed , the curtains of which were drawn , 
the most lovely sight he had ever looked upon--a princess , who appeared
to be about fifteen or sixteen , and so fair that she seemed to belong to
another world . He drew near , trembling and wondering , and knelt beside
her . Her hand lay upon her breast , and he touched his lips to it . At
that moment , the enchantment being ended , the princess awoke , and , 
looking drowsily and tenderly at the young man , said : 

 " Have you come , my prince ? I have waited long for you . " The prince was
overjoyed at the words , and at the tender voice and look , and scarcely
knew how to speak . But he managed to assure her of his love , and they
soon forgot all else as they talked and talked . They talked for four
hours , and had not then said half that was in their heads to say . 

Meanwhile all the rest of the people in the castle had been wakened at
the same moment as the princess , and they were now extremely hungry . The
lady-in-waiting became very impatient , and at length announced to the
princess that they all waited for her . Then the prince took the princess
by the hand; she was dressed in great splendour , but he did not hint
that she looked as he had seen pictures of his great-grandmother look;
he thought her all the more charming for that . They passed into a hall
of mirrors , where they supped , attended by the officers of the princess . 
The violins and haut-boys played old but excellent pieces of music , and
after supper , to lose no time , the grand almoner married the royal
lovers in the chapel of the castle . 

When they left the castle the next day to return to the prince ' s home , 
they were followed by all the retinue of the princess . They marched down
the long avenue , and the wood opened again to let them pass . Outside
they met the prince ' s followers , who were overjoyed to see their master . 
He turned to show them the castle , but behold ! there was no castle to be
seen , and no wood; castle and wood had vanished , but the prince and
princess went gayly away , and when the old king and queen died they
reigned in their stead . 


