There was once a queen , who had been the mother of several children , 
but all were dead , except one daughter , of whom she was excessively
fond , humouring and indulging her in all her ways and wishes . This
princess was so extremely beautiful , that she was called All-Fair , and
twenty kings were , at one time , paying their addresses to her . She had
so many lovers , indeed , that she did not know which to choose , and
refused them all . Her mother , being advanced in years , was anxious to
see her married and settled before she died; but as no entreaties
could prevail , she determined to go to the Desert Fairy to ask advice
concerning her stubborn daughter . 

Now , this fairy being guarded by two fierce lions , the queen made a
cake of millet , sugar-candy , and crocodiles ' eggs , in order to appease
their fury , and pass by them; and having thus provided herself , she
set out . After travelling some time she found herself weary , and lying
down under a tree fell asleep . When she awoke , she heard the roaring
of the lions which guarded the fairy , and on looking for her cake she
found it was gone . This threw her into the utmost agony , as she felt
sure she should be devoured; when , hearing somebody approach , she
raised her eyes , and saw in a tree a little yellow man half a yard
high , picking and eating oranges . 

 " Ah ! queen , " said the Yellow Dwarf , for so he was called on account of
his complexion , and the orange-tree in which he lived ,  " how will you
escape the lions ? There is but one way; I know what business brought
you here; promise me your daughter in marriage and I will save you . " 

The queen , though she could not look without horror upon so frightful
a figure , was forced to consent; and having agreed to the terms
proposed , she instantly found herself in her own palace , and all that
had passed seemed much like a dream : nevertheless , she was so
thoroughly persuaded of the reality of it , that she became melancholy . 

The young princess being unable to learn the cause of her mother ' s
dejection , resolved in her turn to go and inquire of the Desert Fairy;
and , accordingly , having prepared a cake for the lions , she also set
off on the same journey . It happened that All-Fair took exactly the
route her mother had done before her; and coming to the fatal tree
which was loaded with oranges , she felt inclined to pick some;
therefore , laying down her basket , in which she carried the cake , she
plentifully indulged herself with the delicious fruit . 

The lions now began to roar; All-Fair , looking for her cake , was
thrown into the utmost despair to find it gone; and as she was
lamenting her deplorable situation , the Yellow Dwarf presented himself
to her with these words : -- " Lovely princess , dry your tears , and hear
what I am going to say . You need not proceed to the Desert Fairy , to
know the reason of your mother ' s indisposition--it is this : she is
ungenerous enough to repent having promised you , her only daughter , to
me in marriage-- " 

 " How ! " interrupted the princess;  " my mother promised me to you in
marriage;--you such a fright as you ! " 

 " None of your scoffs , " returned the Yellow Dwarf;  " I warn you not to
rouse my anger . If you will promise to marry me , I will be the
tenderest and most loving husband in the world; if not , save yourself
from the lions , if you can . " 

The princess , overcome with terror , gave the promise; but such was the
agony of her mind , that she fell into a swoon , and , when she
recovered , she found herself in her own bed , finely adorned with
ribands , with a ring of a single red hair so fastened round her finger
that it could not be got off . 

This adventure had the same effect upon All Fair as the former one had
had upon her mother . She grew melancholy , which was remarked and
wondered at by the whole court . The best way to divert her , they
thought , would be to urge her to marry; which the princess , who was
now become less obstinate on that point than formerly , consented to . 
Trusting that such a pigmy as the Yellow Dwarf would not dare to
contend with so gallant a person as the King of the Golden Mines , she
fixed upon that prince for her husband . He was exceedingly rich and
powerful , and loved her to distraction . The most superb preparations
were made for the nuptials , and the happy day was fixed when , as they
were proceeding to the ceremony , they saw moving towards them a box , 
upon which sat an old woman remarkable for her ugliness . 

 " Hold , queen and princess ! " cried she , knitting her brows;  " remember
the promises you have both made to my friend the Yellow Dwarf . I am
the Desert Fairy; and unless All-Fair consent to marry him , I solemnly
swear to burn my crutch . " 

The queen and princess were struck almost motionless by this
unexpected address of the fairy; but the Prince of the Golden Mines
was exceeding angry , and holding his sword to her throat , he said , 
 " Fly , wretch ! or thy malice shall cost thee thy life . " 

No sooner had he uttered these words , than the top of the box flying
off , out came the Yellow Dwarf , mounted upon a large Spanish cat . 
Placing himself between the king and the fairy , he exclaimed ,  " Rash
youth ! thy rage shall be levelled at me , not at the Desert Fairy . I am
thy rival , and claim thy princess , who is fast bound to me by her own
promise , her mother ' s , and the single red hair that you see round her
finger . " 

This so enraged the king , that he cried out ,  " Contemptible creature ! 
wert thou worthy of notice , I would sacrifice thee for thy
presumption . " 

The Yellow Dwarf , clapping spurs to his cat , and drawing a cutlass , 
now defied the king to combat; and down they went into the courtyard . 
The sun was immediately turned as red as blood , the air became dark , 
it thundered heavily , and the flashes of lightning discovered two
giants vomiting fire on each side of the Yellow Dwarf . The king
behaved with such undaunted courage , as to give the dwarf great
trouble; but he was dismayed when he saw the Desert Fairy , mounted on
a winged griffin , and with her head covered with snakes , strike the
princess so hard with a lance , that she fell into the queen ' s arms , 
covered with blood . He immediately left the combat , to go to the
relief of his beloved , but the dwarf was too quick for him; and flying
on his Spanish cat to the balcony where she was , he took her from her
mother ' s arms , leaped with her upon the top of the palace , and
immediately disappeared . 

As the king stood confused and astonished at this strange adventure , 
he suddenly found a mist before his eyes , and felt himself lifted up
in the air by some extraordinary power; for the Desert Fairy had
fallen in love with him . To secure him for herself , therefore , she
carried him to a frightful cavern , hoping he would there forget
All-Fair . But finding this scheme ineffectual , she resolved to carry
him to a place altogether as pleasant as the other was terrible; and
accordingly placed him in a chariot drawn by swans . In passing through
the air , he was unspeakably surprised to see his beloved princess in a
castle of polished steel , leaning her head on one hand , and wiping
away her tears with the other . She happened to look up , and had the
mortification to see the king sitting by the fairy who then , by her
art , made herself appear extremely beautiful . Had not the king been
sensible of the fairy ' s power , he would certainly have tried to free
himself from her by some means or other; but he knew it would be in
vain , and therefore made believe to have a liking for her . At last
they came to a stately palace , fenced on one side by walls of
emeralds , and on the other by a boisterous sea . The king , by
pretending an attachment to the fairy , obtained the liberty to walk by
himself on the shore . There , one day , he heard a voice , and presently
after was surprised by the appearance of a mermaid , who , swimming up
to him with a pleasing smile , spoke to this effect : -- " O King of the
Golden Mines , I well know all that has befallen you and the Princess
All-Fair . Do not suspect this to be a contrivance of the fairy to try
you , for I am an inveterate enemy both to her and the Yellow Dwarf;
therefore , if you will place confidence in me , I will lend you my
assistance to procure the release , not only of yourself , but of
All-Fair also . " 

The overjoyed king promised to do whatever the mermaid should direct , 
and seating himself by her desire upon her fish ' s tail , they sailed
away together over the rolling sea . 

When they had sailed some time ,  " Now , " said the mermaid to the king , 
 " we are approaching the place where your princess is kept prisoner by
the Yellow Dwarf . You will have many enemies to fight before you can
come to her , take , therefore , this sword , with which you may overcome
everything , provided you never let it go out of your hand . " 

The king returned her all the thanks that the most grateful heart
could suggest; and the mermaid landed and took leave of him , promising
him farther assistance when necessary . The king boldly advanced , and , 
meeting with two terrible sphinxes , laid them dead at his feet with
the sword . Next he attacked six dragons that opposed him , and
despatched them also . Then he met four-and-twenty nymphs , crowned with
garlands of flowers , at the sight of whom he stopped , being unwilling
to destroy so much beauty; when he heard a voice say ,  " Strike ! strike ! 
or you lose your princess for ever ! " So he threw himself into the
midst of the nymphs , smiting right and left , and soon dispersed them . 

Presently he came to the castle , where was imprisoned the princess
All-Fair .  " O my princess , " exclaimed he ,  " behold your faithful lover ! " 

 " Faithful lover ! " she replied , drawing herself back :  " Did I not see
you passing through the air with a beautiful nymph ? were you faithful
then ? " 

 " Yes , " replied the king ,  " I was . That was the detested Desert Fairy , 
who was carrying me to a place where I must have languished out all my
days , had it not been for a kind mermaid , by whose assistance it is
that I am now come to release you . " Having uttered these words , he
threw himself at her feet; but , catching hold of her gown he
unfortunately let go the magic sword , which the Yellow Dwarf no sooner
discovered , than , leaping from behind a shrub , where he had been
concealed , he ran and seized it . By two cabalistical words he then
conjured up a couple of giants , who laid the king in irons . 

 " Now , " said the Dwarf ,  " my rival ' s fate is in my own hands; however , 
if he will consent to my marriage with the princess All-Fair , he shall
have his life and liberty . " 

 " No , " said the king ,  " I scorn thy favour on such terms . " 

The dwarf was so exasperated by this reply , that he instantly stabbed
the king to the heart . The disconsolate princess stood a moment
petrified , and then exclaimed ,  " Thou hideous creature ! since
entreaties could not avail thee , perhaps thou now reliest upon force;
but thou shalt be disappointed . I will die for the love I have for the
King of the Golden Mines ! " and so saying she sank down upon his body , 
and expired without a sigh . 

Thus ended the fate of these two faithful lovers , whom the mermaid
very much regretted; but as all her power lay in the sword , she could
only change them into two palm-trees , which , preserving a constant and
mutual affection , still fondly unite their branches together . 


