There was once a very rich merchant , who had six children , three boys
and three girls . As he was himself a man of great sense , he spared no
expense for their education , but provided them with all sorts of masters
for their improvement . The three daughters were all handsome , but
particularly the youngest : indeed she was so very beautiful that in her
childhood every one called her the Little Beauty , and being still the
same when she was grown up , nobody called her by any other name , which
made her sisters very jealous of her . This youngest daughter was not
only more handsome than her sisters , but was also better tempered . The
two eldest were vain of being rich , and spoke with pride to those they
thought below them . They gave themselves a thousand airs , and would not
visit other merchants ' daughters; nor would they indeed be seen with any
but persons of quality . They went every day to balls , plays , and public
walks , and always made game of their youngest sister for spending her
time in reading , or other useful employments . As it was well known that
these young ladies would have large fortunes , many great merchants
wished to get them for wives; but the two eldest always answered that , 
for their parts , they had no thoughts of marrying any one below a duke , 
or an earl at least . Beauty had quite as many offers as her sisters , but
she always answered with the greatest civility , that she was much
obliged to her lovers , but would rather live some years longer with her
father , as she thought herself too young to marry . 

It happened that by some unlucky accident the merchant suddenly lost all
his fortune , and had nothing left but a small cottage in the country . 
Upon this , he said to his daughters , while the tears ran down his cheeks
all the time ,  " My children , we must now go and dwell in the cottage , and
try to get a living by labour , for we have no other means of support . " 
The two eldest replied that , for their parts , they did not know how to
work , and would not leave town; for they had lovers enough who would be
glad to marry them , though they had no longer any fortune . But in this
they were mistaken; for when the lovers heard what had happened , they
said ,  " The girls were so proud and ill-tempered , that all we wanted was
their fortune; we are not sorry at all to see their pride brought down . 
Let them give themselves airs to their cows and sheep . " But every body
pitied poor Beauty , because she was so sweet-tempered and kind to all
that knew her; and several gentlemen offered to marry her , though she
had not a penny; but Beauty still refused , and said she could not think
of leaving her poor father in this trouble and would go and help him in
his labours in the country . At first Beauty could not help sometimes
crying in secret for the hardships she was now obliged to suffer; but in
a very short time she said to herself ,  " All the crying in the world will
do me no good , so I will try to be happy without a fortune . " 

When they had removed to their cottage , the merchant and his three sons
employed themselves in ploughing and sowing the fields , and working in
the garden . Beauty also did her part , for she got up by four o ' clock
every morning , lighted the fires , cleaned the house , and got the
breakfast for the whole family . At first she found all this very hard;
but she soon grew quite used to it , and thought it no hardship at all;
and indeed the work greatly amended her health . When she had done , she
used to amuse herself with reading , playing on her music , or singing
while she spun . But her two sisters were at a loss what to do to pass
the time away : they had their breakfast in bed , and did not rise till
ten o ' clock . Then they commonly walked out; but always found themselves
very soon tired; when they would often sit down under a shady tree , and
grieve for the loss of their carriage and fine clothes , and say to each
other ,  " What a mean-spirited poor stupid creature our young sister is , 
to be so content with our low way of life ! " But their father thought in
quite another way : he admired the patience of this sweet young creature;
for her sisters not only left her to do the whole work of the house , but
made game of her every moment . 

After they had lived in this manner about a year , the merchant received
a letter , which informed him that one of the richest ships , which he
thought was lost , had just come into port . This news made the two eldest
sisters almost mad with joy; for they thought they should now leave the
cottage , and have all their finery again . When they found that their
father must take a journey to the ship , the two eldest begged he would
not fail to bring them back some new gowns , caps , rings , and all sorts
of trinkets . But Beauty asked for nothing; for she thought in herself
that all the ship was worth would hardly buy every thing her sisters
wished for .  " Beauty , " said the merchant ,  " how comes it about that you
ask for nothing; what can I bring you , my child ? "  " Since you are so kind
as to think of me , dear father , " she answered ,  " I should be glad if you
would bring me a rose , for we have none in our garden . " Now Beauty did
not indeed wish for a rose , nor any thing else , but she only said this , 
that she might not affront her sisters , for else they would have said
she wanted her father to praise her for not asking him for any thing . 
The merchant took his leave of them and set out on his journey; but when
he got to the ship , some persons went to law with him about the cargo , 
and after a deal of trouble , he came back to his cottage as poor as he
had gone away . When he was within thirty miles of his home , and thinking
of the joy he should have in again meeting his children , his road lay
through a thick forest , and he quite lost himself . It rained and snowed
very hard , and besides , the wind was so high as to throw him twice from
his horse . Night came on , and he thought to be sure he should die of
cold and hunger , or be torn to pieces by the wolves that he heard
howling round him . All at once , he now cast his eyes towards a long row
of trees , and saw a light at the end of them , but it seemed a great way
off . He made the best of his way towards it , and found that it came from
a fine palace , lighted all over . He walked faster , and soon reached the
gates , which he opened , and was very much surprised that he did not see
a single person or creature in any of the yards . His horse had followed
him , and finding a stable with the door open , went into it at once; and
here the poor beast , being nearly starved , helped himself to a good meal
of oats and hay . His master then tied him up , and walked towards the
house , which he entered , but still without seeing a living creature . He
went on to a large hall , where he found a good fire , and a table covered
with some very nice dishes , and only one plate with a knife and fork . As
the snow and rain had wetted him to the skin , he went up to the fire to
dry himself .  " I hope , " said he ,  " the master of the house or his servants
will excuse me , for to be sure it will not be long now before I see
them . " He waited a good time , but still nobody came : at last the clock
struck eleven , and the merchant , being quite faint for the want of food , 
helped himself to a chicken , which he made but two mouthfuls of , and
then to a few glasses of wine , yet all the time trembling with fear . He
sat till the clock struck twelve , but did not see a single creature . He
now took courage , and began to think of looking a little more about him;
so he opened a door at the end of the hall , and went through it into a
very grand room , In which there was a fine bed; and as he was quite weak
and tired , he shut the door , took off his clothes , and got into it . 

It was ten o ' clock in the morning before he thought of getting up , when
he was amazed to see a handsome new suit of clothes laid ready for him , 
instead of his own , which he had spoiled .  " To be sure , " said he to
himself ,  " this place belongs to some good fairy , who has taken pity on
my ill luck . " He looked out of the window , and , instead of snow , he saw
the most charming arbours covered with all kinds of flowers . He returned
to the hall , where he had supped , and found a breakfast table , with some
chocolate got ready for him .  " Indeed , my good fairy , " said the merchant
aloud ,  " I am vastly obliged to you for your kind care of me . " He then
made a hearty breakfast , took his hat , and was going to the stable to
pay his horse a visit; but as he passed under one of the arbours , which
was loaded with roses , he thought of what Beauty had asked him to bring
back to her , and so he took a bunch of roses to carry home . At the same
moment he heard a most shocking noise , and saw such a frightful beast
coming towards him , that he was ready to drop with fear .  " Ungrateful
man ! " said the beast , in a terrible voice ,  " I have saved your life by
letting you into my palace , and in return you steal my roses , which I
value more than any thing else that belongs to me . But you shall make
amends for your fault with your life . You shall die in a quarter of an
hour . " The merchant fell on his knees to the beast , and clasping his
hands , said ,  " My lord , I humbly beg your pardon . I did not think it
would offend you to gather a rose for one of my daughters , who wished to
have one . "  " I am not a lord , but a beast , " replied the monster;  " I do
not like false compliments , but that people should say what they think : 
so do not fancy that you can coax me by any such ways . You tell me that
you have daughters; now I will pardon you , if one of them will agree to
come and die instead of you . Go; and if your daughters should refuse , 
promise me that you yourself will return in three months . " 

The tender-hearted merchant had no thought of letting any one of his
daughters die instead of him; but he knew that if he seemed to accept
the beast ' s terms , he should at least have the pleasure of seeing them
once again . So he gave the beast his promise; and the beast told him he
might then set off as soon as he liked .  " But , " said the beast ,  " I do not
wish you to go back empty-handed . Go to the room you slept in , and you
will find a chest there; fill it with just what you like best , and I
will get it taken to your own house for you , " When the beast had said
this , he went away; and the good merchant said to himself ,  " If I must
die , yet I shall now have the comfort of leaving my children some
riches , " He returned to the room he had slept in , and found a great many
pieces of gold . He filled the chest with them to the very brim , locked
it , and mounting his horse , left the palace as sorry as he had been glad
when he first found it . The horse took a path across the forest of his
own accord , and in a few hours they reached the merchant ' s house . His
children came running round him as he got off his horse; but the
merchant , instead of kissing them with joy , could not help crying as he
looked at them . He held in his hand the bunch of roses , which he gave to
Beauty , saying :  " Take these roses , Beauty; but little do you think how
dear they have cost your poor father; " and then he gave them an account
of all that he had seen or heard in the palace of the beast . The two
eldest sisters now began to shed tears , and to lay the blame upon
Beauty , who they said would be the cause of her father ' s death  " See , " 
said they ,  " what happens from the pride of the little wretch . Why did
not she ask for fine things as we did ? But , to be sure , miss must not be
like other people; and though she will be the cause of her father ' s
death , yet she does not shed a tear . "  " It would be of no use , " replied
Beauty ,  " to weep for the death of my father , for he shall not die now . 
As the beast will accept of one of his daughters , I will give myself up
to him; and think myself happy in being able at once to save his life , 
and prove my love for the best of fathers . "  " No , sister , " said the three
brothers ,  " you shall not die; we will go in search for this monster , and
either he or we will perish . "  " Do not hope to kill him , " said the
merchant ,  " for his power is far too great for you to be able to do any
such thing . I am charmed with the kindness of Beauty , but I will not
suffer her life to be lost . I myself am old , and cannot expect to live
much longer; so I shall but give up a few years of my life , and shall
only grieve for the sake of my children . "  " Never , father , " cried Beauty , 
 " shall you go to the palace without me; for you cannot hinder my going
after you . Though young , I am not over fond of life; and I would much
rather be eaten up by the monster , than die of the grief your loss would
give me . " The merchant tried in vain to reason with Beauty , for she
would go; which , in truth , made her two sisters glad , for they were
jealous of her , because everybody loved her . 

The merchant was so grieved at the thoughts of losing his child , that he
never once thought of the chest filled with gold; but at night , to his
great surprise , he found it standing by his bedside . He said nothing
about his riches to his eldest daughters , for he knew very well it would
at once make them want to return to town; but he told Beauty his secret , 
and she then said , that while he was away , two gentlemen had been on a
visit to their cottage , who had fallen in love with her two sisters . She
then begged her father to marry them without delay; for she was so
sweet-tempered , that she loved them for all they had used her so ill , 
and forgave them with all her heart . When the three months were past , 
the merchant and Beauty got ready to set out for the palace of the
beast . Upon this , the two sisters rubbed their eyes with an onion , to
make believe they shed a great many tears; but both the merchant and his
sons cried in earnest . There was only Beauty who did not , for she
thought that this would only make the matter worse . They reached the
palace in a very few hours , and the horse , without bidding , went into
the same stable as before . The merchant and Beauty walked towards the
large hall , where they found a table covered with every dainty , and two
plates laid ready . The merchant had very little appetite; but Beauty , 
that she might the better hide her grief , placed herself at the table , 
and helped her father; she then began herself to eat , and thought all
the time that to be sure the beast had a mind to fatten her before he
eat her up , as he had got such good cheer for her . When they had done
their supper , they heard a great noise , and the good old man began to
bid his poor child farewell , for he knew it was the beast coming to
them . When Beauty first saw his frightful form , she could not help being
afraid; but she tried to hide her fear as much as she could . The beast
asked her if she had come quite of her own accord , and though she was
now still more afraid than before , she made shift to say ,  " Y-e-s . "  " You
are a good girl , and I think myself very much obliged to you . " He then
turned towards her father , and said to him ,  " Good man , you may leave the
palace to-morrow morning , and take care never to come back to it again . 
Good night , Beauty . "  " Good night , beast , " said she; and then the monster
went out of the room . 

 " Ah ! my dear child , " said the merchant , kissing his daughter ,  " I am half
dead already , at the thoughts of leaving you with this dreadful beast;
you had better go back , and let me stay in your place . "  " No , " said
Beauty boldly ,  " I will never agree to that; you must go home to-morrow
morning . " They then wished each other good night , and went to bed , both
of them thinking they should not be able to close their eyes; but as
soon as ever they had laid down , they fell into a deep sleep , and did
not wake till morning . Beauty dreamed that a lady came up to her , who
said ,  " I am very much pleased , Beauty , with the goodness you have shown , 
in being willing to give your life to save that of your father; and it
shall not go without a reward . " As soon as Beauty awoke , she told her
father this dream; but though it gave him some comfort , he could not
take leave of his darling child without shedding many tears . When the
merchant got out of sight , Beauty sat down in the large hall , and began
to cry also; yet she had a great deal of courage , and so she soon
resolved not to make her sad case still worse by sorrow , which she knew
could not be of any use to her , but to wait as well as she could till
night , when she thought the beast would not fail to come and eat her up . 
She walked about to take a view of all the palace , and the beauty of
every part of it much charmed her . 

But what was her surprise , when she came to a door on which was written , 
_Beauty ' s room_ ! She opened it in haste , and her eyes were all at once
dazzled at the grandeur of the inside of the room . What made her wonder
more than all the rest was a large library filled with books , a
harpsichord , and many other pieces of music .  " The beast takes care I
shall not be at a loss how to amuse myself , " said she . She then thought
that it was not likely such things would have been got ready for her , if
she had but one day to live; and began to hope all would not turn out so
bad as she and her father had feared . She opened the library , and saw
these verses written in letters of gold on the back of one of the books : 

  " Beauteous lady , dry your tears , 
 Here ' s no cause for sighs or fears;
 Command as freely as you may , 
 Enjoyment still shall mark your sway . " 

 " Alas ! " said she , sighing ,  " there is nothing I so much desire as to see
my poor father and to know what he is doing at this moment , " She said
this to herself; but just then by chance , she cast her eyes on a
looking-glass that stood near her , and in the glass she saw her home , 
and her father riding up to the cottage in the deepest sorrow . Her
sisters came out to meet him , but for all they tried to look sorry , it
was easy to see that in their hearts they were very glad . In a short
time all this picture went away out of the glass : but Beauty began to
think that the beast was very kind to her , and that she had no need to
be afraid of him . About the middle of the day , she found a table laid
ready for her; and a sweet concert of music played all the time she was
eating her dinner without her seeing a single creature . But at supper , 
when she was going to seat herself at table , she heard the noise of the
beast , and could not help trembling with fear .  " Beauty , " said he ,  " will
you give me leave to see you sup ? "  " That is as you please , " answered
she , very much afraid .  " Not in the least , " said the beast;  " you alone
command in this place . If you should not like my company , you need only
to say so , and I will leave you that moment . But tell me , Beauty , do you
not think me very ugly ? "  " Why , yes , " said she ,  " for I cannot tell a
story; but then I think you are very good . "  " You are right , " replied the
beast;  " and , besides being ugly , I am also very stupid : I know very well
enough that I am but a beast . " 

 " I should think you cannot be very stupid , " said Beauty ,  " if you
yourself know this . "  " Pray do not let me hinder you from eating , " said
he;  " and be sure you do not want for any thing; for all you see is
yours , and I shall be vastly grieved if you are not happy . "  " You are
very kind , " said Beauty :  " I must needs own that I think very well of
your good nature , and then I almost forget how ugly you are . "  " Yes , yes , 
I hope I am good-tempered , " said he ,  " but still I am a monster . "  " There
are many men who are worse monsters than you are , " replied Beauty;  " and
I am better pleased with you in that form , though it is so ugly , than
with those who carry wicked hearts under the form of a man . "  " If I had
any sense , " said the beast ,  " I would thank you for what you have said;
but I am too stupid to say any thing that would give you pleasure . " 
Beauty ate her supper with a very good appetite , and almost lost all her
dread of the monster; but she was ready to sink with fright , when he
said to her ,  " Beauty , will you be my wife ? " For a few minutes she was
not able to speak a word , for she was afraid of putting him in a
passion , by refusing . At length she said ,  " No , beast . " The beast made no
reply , but sighed deeply , and went away . When Beauty found herself
alone , she began to feel pity for the poor beast .  " Dear ! " said she , 
 " what a sad thing it is that he should be so very frightful , since he is
so good-tempered ! " 

Beauty lived three months in this palace , very well pleased . The beast
came to see her every night , and talked with her while she supped; and
though what he said was not very clever , yet as she saw in him every day
some new mark of his goodness , so instead of dreading the time of his
coming , she was always looking at her watch , to see if it was almost
nine o ' clock; for that was the time when he never failed to visit her . 
There was but one thing that vexed her; which was that every night , 
before the beast went away from her , he always made it a rule to ask her
if she would be his wife , and seemed very much grieved at her saying no . 
At last , one night , she said to him ,  " You vex me greatly , beast , by
forcing me to refuse you so often; I wish I could take such a liking to
you as to agree to marry you , but I must tell you plainly , that I do not
think it will ever happen . I shall always be your friend; so try to let
that make you easy . "  " I must needs do so then , " said the beast ,  " for I
know well enough how frightful I am; but I love you better than myself . 
Yet I think I am very lucky in your being pleased to stay with me; now
promise me , Beauty , that you will never leave me . " Beauty was quite
struck when he said this , for that very day she had seen in her glass
that her father had fallen sick of grief for her sake , and was very ill
for the want of seeing her again .  " I would promise you , with all my
heart , " said she ,  " never to leave you quite; but I long so much to see
my father , that if you do not give me leave to visit him I shall die
with grief . "  " I would rather die myself , Beauty , " answered the beast , 
 " than make you fret; I will send you to your father ' s cottage , you shall
stay there , and your poor beast shall die of sorrow . "  " No , " said Beauty , 
crying ,  " I love you too well to be the cause of your death; I promise to
return in a week . You have shown me that my sisters are married , and my
brothers are gone for soldiers , so that my father is left all alone . Let
me stay a week with him . "  " You shall find yourself with him to-morrow
morning , " replied the beast;  " but mind , do not forget your promise . When
you wish to return you have nothing to do but to put your ring on a
table when you go to bed . Good-bye , Beauty ! " The beast then sighed as he
said these words , and Beauty went to bed very sorry to see him so much
grieved . When she awoke in the morning , she found herself in her
father ' s cottage . She rung a bell that was at her bedside , and a servant
entered; but as soon as she saw Beauty , the woman gave a loud shriek;
upon which the merchant ran up stairs , and when he beheld his daughter
he was ready to die of joy . He ran to the bedside , and kissed her a
hundred times . At last Beauty began to remember that she had brought no
clothes with her to put on; but the servant told her she had just found
in the next room a large chest full of dresses , trimmed all over with
gold , and adorned with pearls and diamonds . 

Beauty in her own mind thanked the beast for his kindness , and put on
the plainest gown she could find among them all . She then told the
servant to put the rest away with a great deal of care , for she intended
to give them to her sisters; but as soon as she had spoken these words
the chest was gone out of sight in a moment . Her father then said , 
perhaps the beast chose for her to keep them all for herself; and as
soon as he had said this , they saw the chest standing again in the same
place . While Beauty was dressing herself , a servant brought word to her
that her sisters were come with their husbands to pay her a visit . They
both lived unhappily with the gentlemen they had married . The husband of
the eldest was very handsome; but was so very proud of this , that he
thought of nothing else from morning till night , and did not attend to
the beauty of his wife . The second had married a man of great learning;
but he made no use of it , only to torment and affront all his friends , 
and his wife more than any of them . The two sisters were ready to burst
with spite when they saw Beauty dressed like a princess , and look so
very charming . All the kindness that she showed them was of no use; for
they were vexed more than ever , when she told them how happy she lived
at the palace of the beast . The spiteful creatures went by themselves
into the garden , where they cried to think of her good fortune .  " Why
should the little wretch be better off than we ? " said they .  " We are much
handsomer than she is . "  " Sister , " said the eldest ,  " a thought has just
come into my head : let us try to keep her here longer than the week that
the beast gave her leave for : and then he will be so angry , that perhaps
he will eat her up in a moment . "  " That is well thought of , " answered the
other ,  " but to do this we must seem very kind to her . " They then made up
their minds to be so , and went to join her in the cottage where they
showed her so much false love , that Beauty could not help crying for
joy . 

When the week was ended , the two sisters began to pretend so much grief
at the thoughts of her leaving them , that she agreed to stay a week
more; but all that time Beauty could not help fretting for the sorrow
that she knew her staying would give her poor beast; for she tenderly
loved him , and much wished for his company again . The tenth night of her
being at the cottage she dreamed she was in the garden of the palace , 
and that the beast lay dying on a grass plot , and , with his last breath , 
put her in mind of her promise , and laid his death to her keeping away
from him; Beauty awoke in a great fright , and burst into tears .  " Am not
I wicked , " said she ,  " to behave so ill to a beast who has shown me so
much kindness; why will I not marry him ? I am sure I should be more
happy with him than my sisters are with their husbands . He shall not be
wretched any longer on my account; for I should do nothing but blame
myself all the rest of my life , " 

She then rose , put her ring on the table , got into bed again , and soon
fell asleep . In the morning she with joy found herself in the palace of
the beast . She dressed herself very finely , that she might please him
the better , and thought she had never known a day pass away so slow . At
last the clock struck nine , but the beast did not come . Beauty then
thought to be sure she had been the cause of his death in earnest . She
ran from room to room all over the palace , calling out his name , but
still she saw nothing of him . After looking for him a long time , she
thought of her dream , and ran directly towards the grass plot; and there
she found the poor beast lying senseless and seeming dead . She threw
herself upon his body , thinking nothing at all of his ugliness; and
finding his heart still beat , she ran and fetched some water from a pond
in the garden , and threw it on his face . The beast then opened his eyes , 
and said :  " You have forgot your promise , Beauty . My grief for the loss
of you has made me resolve to starve myself to death; but I shall die
content , since I have had the pleasure of seeing you once more . "  " No , 
dear beast , " replied Beauty ,  " you shall not die; you shall live to be my
husband : from this moment I offer to marry you , and will be only yours . 
Oh ! I thought I felt only friendship for you; but the pain I now feel , 
shows me that I could not live without seeing you . " 

The moment Beauty had spoken these words , the palace was suddenly
lighted up , and music , fireworks , and all kinds of rejoicings , appeared
round about them . Yet Beauty took no notice of all this , but watched
over her dear beast with the greatest tenderness . But now she was all at
once amazed to see at her feet , instead of her poor beast , the
handsomest prince that ever was seen , who thanked her most warmly for
having broken his enchantment . Though this young prince deserved all her
notice , she could not help asking him what was become of the beast .  " You
see him at your feet , Beauty , " answered the prince ,  " for I am he . A
wicked fairy had condemned me to keep the form of a beast till a
beautiful young lady should agree to marry me , and ordered me , on pain
of death , not to show that I had any sense . You , alone , dearest Beauty , 
have kindly judged of me by the goodness of my heart; and in return I
offer you my hand and my crown , though I know the reward is much less
than what I owe you . " Beauty , in the most pleasing surprise , helped the
prince to rise , and they walked along to the palace , when her wonder was
very great to find her father and sisters there , who had been brought by
the lady Beauty had seen in her dream .  " Beauty , " said the lady  ( for she
was a fairy ) ,  " receive the reward of the choice you have made . You have
chosen goodness of heart rather than sense and beauty; therefore you
deserve to find them all three joined in the same person . You are going
to be a great Queen : I hope a crown will not destroy your virtue . " 

 " As for you , ladies , " said the fairy to the other two sisters ,  " I have
long known the malice of your hearts , and the wrongs you have done . You
shall become two statues; but under that form you shall still keep your
reason , and shall be fixed at the gates of your sister ' s palace; and I
will not pass any worse sentence on you than to see her happy . You will
never appear in your own persons again till you are fully cured of your
faults; and to tell the truth , I am very much afraid you will remain
statues for ever . " 

At the same moment , the fairy , with a stroke of her wand , removed all
who were present to the young prince ' s country , where he was received
with the greatest joy by his subjects . He married Beauty , and passed a
long and happy life with her , because they still kept in the same course
of goodness from which they had never departed . ﻿
