Poppypink sat up in bed and yawned .  " Why is everybody getting up so
early ? " she asked .  " Is it a holiday ? " 

The older fairies were dressing themselves and brushing their long fine
hair .  " Wonderwings is coming to see us , " they said .  " Jump up , little
Poppypink . " 

 " Who is Wonderwings ? " she asked . 

 " You will see when you are dressed . Hurry , or you will miss her . " 

 " Oh dear ! I am so sleepy , " said Poppypink , and she yawned again .  " I
don ' t care about Wonderwings . " She snuggled down into the bedclothes
again , and went to sleep . 

Presently she was awakened by the sound of the sweetest singing she had
ever heard , and a flash of brilliant colour went past her window pane of
crystal set in pearl . 

 " That must be Wonderwings , " she said .  " Oh , I must see her . I hope I am
not too late . " 

She sprang from bed and dressed so hurriedly that I am afraid her hair
did not receive its due amount of brushing . Then she ran out into the
garden . 

The older fairies stood all in a group , saying loudly  " I will go , " and
 " I will go . " And before them , scarcely touching the ground with the tip
of her foot , stood poised a glorious fairy , taller than any other there . 
She was altogether beautiful; and her wings--as soon as Poppypink saw
them she knew why the visitor had been called Wonderwings . For they
reached high above her head and almost to the ground , and they glowed
with so many colours that it seemed as if a million jewels had been Hung
upon them and had stuck , growing into a million flashing stars that
made a million little rainbows with every sway and movement of her body . 

 " How lovely ! Oh , how lovely ! " cried Poppypink . She crept nearer to the
beautiful fairy and sat among the daisies at her feet .  " See , " she cried . 
 " My wings are small and colourless . Tell me how I may grow wings like
yours . " Just as little girls adore beautiful hair , so do little fairies
adore beautiful wings . 

Wonderwings smiled down at her .  " Such wings as mine are only to be won
in sadder lands than these , " she said .  " If you would have them you must
leave your fairyland and come where humans live , and where hunger and
sorrow and death trample the city streets . " 

 " I will come ! " cried Poppypink .  " I will come ! " 

 " Come then , " said Wonderwings . She took the little fairy ' s hand , and up
they all rose into the clear air , flying far and far away till they left
their fairyland behind and came at last to the sadder lands where humans
lived . There Wonderwings showed them where hunger and sorrow and death
trampled the city streets , and the band of fairies flew lower and lower
to look . 

 " The children tumble and fight in the dirty lanes , and cry for bread , " 
cried Poppypink .  " The little ones , I cannot bear to hear them sob . " 

 " Perhaps you can help them , " said Wonderwings . 

 " I am only a little fairy . What can I do ? " asked Poppypink .  " I have no
bread to give them . " 

She flew a little lower , to gaze at them more nearly .  " What can I do ? " 
she asked again . 

No answer came . She looked around , and found herself alone . Wonderwings
and the older fairies had in a moment gone from sight . 

Below , a crippled child sat among rags in a dark corner of a dreary
room , and tears ran down her cheeks .  " The sunshine , the pretty yellow
sunshine ! " she wailed .  " If only I could run and play in the pretty
sunshine ! " 

 " Here is something I can do , " thought Poppypink . She gathered armfuls of
the golden sunbeams , and flying with them through the glass as only a
fairy can fly , herself unseen , she heaped them over the twisted hands
and pale thin face of the child , and left her playing with them and
smiling happily . 

Lower she flew to help the little ones who cried about the gutters . She
led the starving and shelterless to comfort , the toddlers to safety; she
brought a flower to the hopeless , ease to sick ones racked with pain; at
night she flew with glittering dreams from room to room , so that even
sad-eyed feeble babies laughed for pleasure in their sleep . Day after
day , night after night she toiled , for weeks and months and years . There
was so much to do ! The time passed like a moment . So busy was she that
she had forgotten all about her wings . 

One day there came a flash of colour in the air beside her , and
Wonderwings and all the older fairies stood around her .  " Dear
Poppypink , " cried one ,  " how your wings have grown ! And how beautiful
they are ! They are so tall that they reach above your head and almost to
the ground , and they glow with so many colours that it seems as if a
million jewels had been flung upon them and had stuck , growing into a
million flashing stars that make a million little rainbows with every
sway and movement of your body . " 

Poppypink laughed with joy .  " I am so glad , so very glad ! " she said .  " I
had forgotten all about my wings . " 

 " Yet they have grown with use , " said Wonderwings;  " and for every deed of
kindness done a star has sprung , to shine in beauty there for evermore . " 


