It happened that on a day King Arthur , wandering from his court , had
fought and vanquished a valiant knight , but he himself had been sore
wounded . Merlin , coming to his aid , had taken him to a hermit ' s cave , 
and there with many marvellous salves had searched his wounds , so that
in three days the king was whole again . 

Riding forth together , Merlin led the king deeper and deeper into a
wild and desolate country where he had never been before , and where
there were no pathways . Arthur looked to and fro over the waste , but
saw no sign of man or beast , and no bird flitted or piped . Great gaunt
stones stood upright on the hillsides , solitary or in long lines as if
they marched , or else they leaned together as if conspiring; while
great heaps or cairns of stone rose here and there from the
lichen-covered and rocky soil , in which the grass grew weakly in small
crevices . 

The mists now rose and drifted before them as they rode , the light was
low and sallow , and the wind began to whisper shrilly among the great
stones , and in the crannies of the cairns . 

The king crossed himself , and looked at the white , old , and wrinkled
face of Merlin; but the wizard seemed sunk in thought . Then Arthur
bethought him that , in case some fiend-shape or wizard-knight should
assail him in that desolate waste , he could not defend himself , 
inasmuch as his sword--the sword he had drawn from the stone--had
snapped when he fought the knight , and he had no other weapon with him . 

 ' Merlin , ' he said ,  ' this is a place of ancient death and terror , and if
aught should assail us of evil , I have no sword . ' 

 ' For that reason I bring thee here , ' replied Merlin , and would not
utter another word . 

Then , through the mists , which writhed and twisted as if they were fell
shapes that would tear down the passing riders , Arthur became aware
that their way was leading downwards , and soon the smell of water rose
up to him . 

He heard the beat and suck of waves upon a shore , and in a little while
the mists cleared as if at a word , and there before him Arthur saw a
lonely lake or sea , hedged round with salt-rimed reeds and sedges , and
stretching out its waters , dull and leaden-hued , to so great a distance
that his eye could see no end . 

 ' What is this place ? ' he asked of Merlin . 

 ' It is the Lake of the Endless Waters , ' said the wizard . 

 ' Why bring ye me to this desolate lake in the wilderness ? ' 

 ' You shall visit it once more--ere you die ! ' replied Merlin .  ' But look
you there in the midmost of the lake . ' 

Looking to where the wizard pointed , Arthur saw a great hand , clothed
in white samite , stretched above the lapsing waves , and in its grasp
was a long two-handed sword in a rich scabbard . 

With that they saw a barge riding over the water , and it came without
oars or any sail , and in the prow sat a woman , tall and comely , with a
face lovely but sad . A frontlet of gold and pearls was bound about her
rich red hair , and her robes , of green samite , fell about her as if
they were reeds of the shore . 

 ' What lady is that ? ' said the king . 

 ' It is the Lady of the Lake , ' said Merlin ,  ' and she comes to you . Now , 
therefore , speak fair to her , and ask that she will give you that
sword . ' 

Then the barge rasped among the reeds where Arthur sat on his horse , 
and the lady said : 

 ' Greeting to you , O king ! ' 

 ' Greeting , fair damsel ! ' replied Arthur .  ' What sword is that which the
arm holdeth above the water ? I would it were mine , for I have none . ' 

 ' Sir king , ' said the lady ,  ' that sword is mine; but if ye will give me
a gift when I ask it of you , and will swear an oath to give me back the
sword when ye shall be dying , then shall ye have it . ' 

 ' By my faith , I will give ye the gift when ye shall desire , and when I
am dying I will truly give back the sword . ' 

 ' Then do you step into this barge and row yourself unto the hand and
take from it the sword . And know ye that the name of that sword is
Excalibur , and while you keep the scabbard by your side , ye shall lose
no blood , be ye never so sore wounded . ' 

So King Arthur and Merlin alighted , tied their horses to two stunted
trees , and went into the barge . The king turned to look to where the
tall green lady had stood but a moment before , and marvelled to see
that she had vanished . 

When they came to the sword which the hand held , King Arthur saw that
the water where the hand rose forth was all troubled , and he could see
naught . He took the sword by the handle , and the great fingers of the
hand opened and then sank . So they came afterwards to the land , and
rode on their way to Camelot , and reached it after many days . 

When King Arthur entered his hall , and had been welcomed by his
knights , the seneschal brought forth a messenger , who had come from
King Rience of North Wales , and the man with insolent looks uttered
this message : 

 ' My lord , King Rience , hath but now discomfited and overwhelmed seven
kings , and each hath done him homage , and given him for a sign of their
subjection their beard clean cut from their chins . And my lord hath
caused a rich mantle to be hemmed with these kings ' beards , and there
yet lacketh one place . Wherefore my lord hath sent me to demand that ye
give him homage and send him thy beard also . Or else he will enter thy
lands , and burn and slay and lay waste , and will not cease until he
hath thy head as well as thy beard . ' 

 ' Now this is the most shameful message that any man sent to a king ! ' 
said Arthur ,  ' and thy king shall rue his villainous words . ' Then he
laughed a little grimly .  ' Thou seest , fellow , that my beard is full
young yet to make a hem . So take this message back to thy master . If he
will have it , he must wait until I grow older; but yet he shall not
wait long before he sees me , and then shall he lose his head , by the
faith of my body , unless he do homage to me . ' 

So the messenger departed , and King Arthur set about the ordering of
his army to invade the land of Rience . 

Later , on a day when the king sat in council with his barons and
knights , there came a damsel into the hall , richly beseen and of a fair
countenance . She knelt at the feet of the king , and said humbly : 

 ' O king , I crave a boon of ye , and by your promise ye shall grant it
me . ' 

 ' Who are ye , damsel ? ' asked the king . 

 ' My lord , my lady mother hath sent me , and she is the Lady of the
Lake . ' 

 ' I remember me , ' said Arthur ,  ' and thou shalt have thy boon . ' 

Whereat the damsel rose and let her mantle fall , that was richly
furred , and then they saw that she was girded about the waist with a
great sword . 

Marvelling , the king asked ,  ' Damsel , for what cause are ye girded with
that sword ? ' 

 ' My lord , ' said the damsel , in distress and sadness ,  ' this sword that I
am girded withal , doth me great sorrow and remembrance . For it was the
sword of him I loved most tenderly in all the world , and he hath been
slain by falsest treachery by a foul knight , Sir Garlon , and nevermore
shall I be joyful . But I would that my dear love be avenged by his own
good sword , which my lady mother hath endowed with great enchantment . 
And the knight of thine that shall draw this sword shall be he who
shall avenge my dead love . But he must be a clean knight , a good man of
his hands and of his deeds , and without guile or treachery . If I may
find such a knight , he shall deliver me of this sword , out of the
scabbard , and with it do vengeance for me . ' 

 ' This is a great marvel , ' said King Arthur ,  ' and while I presume not to
be such a knight as thou sayest , yet for ensample to my knights will I
essay to draw the sword . ' 

Therewith the king took the scabbard and drew at the sword with all his
strength , but in no wise could he make it come forth . 

 ' Sir , ' said the damsel ,  ' ye need not draw half so hard , for lightly
shall it come into the hands of him who shall draw it . ' 

Then the king bade all his knights to attempt this feat , and all tried
their best , but it was of no avail . 

 ' Alas ! ' said the damsel in great sadness .  ' And shall my dear love go
unavenged , because there is no knight here who shall achieve this
sword ? ' 

She turned away through the crowd of knights who stood abashed about
her , and went towards the door . 

It happened that there was a poor knight in the court of King Arthur , 
who had been a prisoner for a year and a day , by reason of his having
slain a kinsman of the king ' s . His name was Sir Balin the Hardy , and he
was a good man of his hands , though needy . He had been but lately
released from durance , and was standing privily in the hall and saw the
adventure of the damsel with the sword . Whereat his heart rose , both to
do the deed for the sorrowing maid and because of her beauty and
sadness . Yet , being poor and meanly arrayed , he pushed not forward in
the press . 

But as the damsel went towards the door , she passed him , and he said : 

 ' Damsel , I pray you of your courtesy to suffer me as well to essay as
these knights , for though I be poorly clothed , my heart seemeth fully
assured that I may draw the sword , and thy sorrow moveth me . ' 

The damsel lifted her large sad eyes to him , and she saw he was goodly
of form and noble of look , and her heart was stirred . 

 ' Though ye be poor , worthiness and manhood are not in a man ' s rich
raiment , and therefore , ' she said with a sorrowful smile ,  ' do you essay
the sword also , good knight , and God speed you . ' 

Balin took the sword by the scabbard , and drew it out easily , and when
he looked upon the sword it pleased him well . 

Then had the king and barons great marvel , but some of the knights had
great spite against Balin . 

 ' Truly , ' said the damsel ,  ' this is a passing good knight , and the best
man of ye all , and many marvels shall he achieve . But now , gentle and
courteous knight , ' she said ,  ' give me the sword again . ' 

 ' Nay , this sword will I keep , ' said Balin . 

 ' Ye are not wise , ' said the maiden sorrowfully .  ' My lady mother sent
the sword to find which was the knight the most worthy to rid the world
of an evil knight that doeth his foul treacheries and murders by
wizardry , but if ye keep the sword it shall work great bane on you and
on one you love most in this world . ' 

 ' I shall take the adventure God shall ordain for me , ' said Balin ,  ' be
it good or ill . ' 

The damsel looked sadly into his eyes and wept . 

 ' I am passing heavy for your sake , ' she said .  ' I repent that I have
brought this to you , for I see you lying wounded unto death , and I
shall not be near to comfort you . ' 

With that the damsel departed in great sorrow . 

Anon Balin sent for his horse and armour , and took his leave of King
Arthur , who was almost wroth that he should depart upon a quest that
promised but misfortune . He would have him stay with him in his court , 
but Balin would not , and so departed . 

For many days , by lonely ways and through forest drives , Sir Balin
fared , seeking for the felon knight Sir Garlon , but nowhere could he
get word of him . At length one night , as he made his way to a hermitage
by the edge of a thick wood , he saw the arms of his younger brother , 
Sir Balan , hung upon a thorn before the holy man ' s door . Just then Sir
Balan came out and saw him , and when he looked on Balin ' s shield , which
had two crossed swords , he recognised his brother ' s device , and ran to
him , and they met and kissed each other , and that night they were happy
together , for it had been long since that they had parted; and each
told the other his adventures . 

 ' It seemeth , then , that this King Arthur is a right worshipful lord , ' 
said Balan , when his brother had told him the adventure of the damsel
and the sword ,  ' but I doubt me he will not withstand King Rience and
his host . Already that king hath come into this land and is harrying
and burning . ' 

 ' That were great pity , ' said Balin ,  ' and I would that I could do some
deed to stay the power of Rience , who is evil-minded and of an arrogant
nature . I would put my life in any danger to win the love of the great
Arthur , and to punish King Rience for his shameful message . ' 

 ' Let us go then to-morrow , ' said Balan ,  ' and try our prowess . King
Rience lieth at the siege of the castle Terabil , within ten leagues of
this place . ' 

 ' I will well , ' said Balin ,  ' and if we slay King Rience , his people will
go astray and King Arthur shall easily make them yield . ' 

Next morning early they rode away through the gay woods , drenched with
dew , which sparkled where the sunlight lit upon it . Long and lonely was
the way , until towards the evening they met with a poor old man on
foot , ragged , lame , and dirty , and bearing a great burden . It was in a
narrow ride of the forest , and there was but room for one person to
pass , and though the brothers were making great speed , since they
doubted they had lost their way , they would not ride down the poor man , 
as many knights would do . 

But Balin , with a cheery call , said :  ' Old man , give me thy pack , and do
thou climb up and sit behind me . For it is late and lonely that such
poor old bones as thine should be abroad . ' 

The old man , either from fear of the two great knights in their black
armour , or from suspicion , mumbled out a few words and refused the
offer , while yet he would not budge from the narrow path . 

 ' Well , then , tell us thy name , old man , ' said Balin , laughing at his
obstinacy . 

 ' At this time I will not tell you , ' croaked the old fellow , stumbling
under his pack . 

 ' I doubt that great pack hath many rich things that never owned thee
master , ' said Balan with a laugh . 

 ' It is full evil seen , ' said Balin ,  ' that thou art a true honest man , 
when thou wilt not tell thy name . ' 

 ' Be that as it may , ' snarled the old man ,  ' but I know your name , my
lordlings , and why you ride this way . ' 

 ' By the faith of my body , but ye are some wizard if ye know that , ' said
Balan mockingly . 

 ' And who may we be ? ' asked Balin .  ' And whither do we ride ? ' 

 ' Ye are brothers , my Lords Balin and Balan , ' answered the old man .  ' And
ye ride to pull King Rience ' s beard . But that ye shall not do , unless
ye take my counsel . ' 

 ' Ah ! ' cried Balin ,  ' I know thee , Merlin ! We would fain be ruled by thy
counsel , old magician . ' 

So it came about , with Merlin ' s aid , that Balin and Balan came upon
King Rience that night with but a small band of his knights , and with a
sudden attack out of the dark wood the two brothers seized the king and
slew many of his men that tried to save him . And when they had ridden
some way towards Camelot with the king , wounded and bound , between
them , Merlin vanished from beside them . 

Then they rode to Camelot at the dawning , and delivered Rience to the
porter at the gate , to be led to King Arthur when he should sit in
hall , and the two knights rode away . So , by the capture of King Rience , 
his host was put to naught , and the king paid his homage to King
Arthur , and swore on the sacred relics of the Abbey of Camelot to be
his true man while he should live . 

At that time Balin could not meet with the felon knight , Sir Garlon , 
who wrought evil by wizardry , and he and his brother went their
different ways seeking adventure . Sir Balin returned to King Arthur and
became one of his most valiant knights . 

It happened on a day that King Arthur journeyed with his knights from
Camelot to London , and he lay in his pavilion in the heat of the day . 
As he rested he heard the noise of a horse , and looking out of the flap
of his tent , he saw a strange knight passing , making great complaint
and sorrowing , and with him was a damsel . 

 ' Abide , fair sir , ' said Arthur ,  ' and tell me wherefore you are
troubled . ' 

 ' Ye may little amend it , ' answered the knight , and passed on . 

Later came Sir Balin and saluted the king , who told him of the strange
knight sorrowing as he rode , and the king bade him follow and bring
back the knight to him ,  ' for , ' said he ,  ' the sorrows of that knight
were so piercing that I would fain know his grief . ' 

Sir Balin took horse and lance and rode many miles through the forest , 
and by evening he came upon the knight and the lady . 

 ' Sir knight , ' said Balin ,  ' ye must come with me unto my lord , King
Arthur , for to tell him the cause of your sorrow . ' 

 ' That will I not , ' answered the knight ,  ' for it would do me none
avail . ' 

 ' Sir , make ready , ' replied Balin ,  ' for ye must needs go with me , or
else I will fight with you and take you by force . ' 

 ' No heart have I to fight , for all joy of life is dead with me , ' said
the knight ,  ' but I am on a fierce quest , and ye must be my warrant if I
go with you that I be not kept from my quest . ' 

 ' I will gladly warrant you , ' said Balin , and together with the lady
they turned back . 

 ' I fear not to tell you my sorrow , ' said the knight as they rode .  ' I
but lately returned from fighting the pagans in the north , and when I
came to my father ' s hall , men told me that the lady that I loved most
tenderly had been robbed away by a villain knight . And as I sorrowed
and went forth to seek the knight to slay him , lo , there I saw my lady , 
who had escaped unscathed from his evil hold . And much joy we made of
each other , for we loved each other tenderly . But even as we kissed , 
there came an arrow through the air and pierced my dear lady to the
heart , so that she fell dead in my arms . And there was none to see who
shot the arrow , but men said it was the felon knight who had taken my
lady , and he had killed her by black magic . So now with this damsel , my
dear sister , who was her friend , do I go through the world seeking the
invisible knight . And when I find him , with God ' s help I will surely
slay him . ' 

The good knight Balin was much moved by the sad story . 

 ' Ah ! ' said he ,  ' it is the same fell knight whose death I seek by this
good sword . And we will fare together , you and I , and take his evil
life when God leads us to him . ' 

Even as Sir Balin spoke , out of a dark glade by their side came a lance
hurtling , as if held in rest by an invisible rider , and while they
turned their heads at the sound of its hissing through the air , it
pierced the side of the sorrowing knight and stood deep in the wound . 

 ' Alas ! ' cried the knight , falling from his horse ,  ' I am slain by the
traitorous and wizard knight . His punishment is not for me , sir knight , 
but I charge you , seek him out and slay him for my sake , and for the
sake of my dead lady . ' 

 ' That will I do , ' said Balin , sorrowing ,  ' and thereof I make a vow to
you and this damsel by my knighthood . ' 

When Balin had told all to his lord , King Arthur , the king made the
knight to be buried in a rich tomb , and on it engraved his sad story , 
together with his name , Sir Herlew , and that of his lady love , 
Gwenellen . 

Balin and the damsel rode forward the next day and for many days , and
ever the lady bore the truncheon of the spear with her by which Sir
Herlew had been slain . 

Then on a day they lodged at the house of a rich knight named Sir
Gwydion , an old grey gentleman , of a sad aspect . When night came , Sir
Balin lay sleeping in the hall beside the fire , and suddenly he awoke
at the sound of one sorrowing quietly near him . He rose up and went to
the pallet and saw it was his host , and he asked him why he mourned in
the dark . 

 ' I will tell you , ' said the old sad knight ,  ' and the telling will
comfort me . I was but late at a jousting , and there I jousted with a
knight that is brother to good King Pellam . And a full evil kinsman is
this knight of so good a king . I smote the evil man from his horse
twice , and he was full of rage that I , an old man , should overcome him . 
Therefore by treachery he assailed my son , a young and untried knight , 
and slew him . And I cannot avenge my dear son , for the evil man goeth
invisible . But I pray that I may meet him in a little while . ' 

 ' Is not his name Garlon ? ' asked Balin . 

 ' Ye say right , ' said Sir Gwydion . 

 ' Ah , I know him , ' replied Balin ,  ' and I had rather meet with him than
have all the gold of this realm . ' 

 ' That shall we both do , ' said his host .  ' For King Pellam , his brother , 
king of the land of Holy Hallows , hath made a cry in all this country , 
of a great feast that shall be in twenty days , and that evil knight , 
your enemy and mine , shall we see there . ' 

On the morrow they rode all three towards the town of King Pellam , and
when they came within the country of Holy Hallows , Sir Balin saw how
fair and happy was the land and its joyful people . Their meadows were
rich with grass , the cattle were thriving and sleek , the trees were
loaded with fruit and the cornfields full with rich ripe corn . 

 ' Why doth it seem , ' asked Balin ,  ' that this country is the fairest and
happiest that ever I saw ? ' 

 ' It is for this , ' said Sir Gwydion ,  ' that in the Castle of Holy
Hallows , whither we wend , King Pellam hath some holy relics of a
passing marvellous power , and while he keepeth these his land is rich
and happy , and plagues cannot enter it nor murrain , nor can pestilence
waste the people . ' 

When they reached the castle they found a great throng of lords and
ladies , and because Sir Gwydion had no lady with him he could not sit
at the feast . But Balin was well received and brought to a chamber , and
they unarmed him . The squires brought him a festal robe to his
pleasure , but he would not suffer them to take his sword . 

 ' Nay , ' said he ,  ' it is my vow that never shall I and my sword be
parted , and that vow will I keep or depart as I came . ' 

So they suffered him to wear it under his robe , and he was set in the
hall with his lady beside him . Anon , when the meal was ended and the
mead horns were set , Sir Balin asked his neighbour whether there was a
knight at that court named Garlon . 

 ' Yonder he goeth , ' said the knight;  ' he with that dark face and
piercing eye . He is the most marvellous knight that is now living , and
though King Pellam loveth him dearly , because he is his brother , yet he
suffers bitterly the evil magic of Sir Garlon . For that knight rideth
invisible , and slays so that none may know how they get their death . ' 

Sir Balin ' s heart rose at these words , and he trembled with his great
anger . 

 ' Ah , well , ' said the good knight .  ' And that is he ? ' 

He considered long within himself what he should do . 

 ' If I slay him here in this crowded hall , ' he said ,  ' I shall surely not
escape , and if I leave him now , peradventure I shall never meet with
him again , and much evil will he do if he be let to live . ' 

He could not remove his eyes from Sir Garlon where he walked between
the tables , proudly talking and laughing with those he knew , and making
soft speeches to ladies , though many showed fear of him , and crossed
their fingers while he spoke to them , to fend off the evil of his eyes . 
Very soon Sir Garlon noticed the fixed , stern look of Sir Balin , and
came across to him and flicked his gauntlet across his face . 

 ' This shall make thee remember me when next thou seest me , knight , ' he
said .  ' But thou hadst better do what thou camest for , and fill thyself
with mead . ' 

 ' Thou sayest sooth , ' said Balin , and clutched the sword under his robe . 
 ' Too long hast thou done evil and despite , and now will I do that for
which I came . ' 

Rising , he drew his sword fiercely and swiftly , and cleaved the head of
Garlon to the shoulders . 

 ' Give me the truncheon wherewith he slew thy brother ! ' said Balin to
the damsel beside him . 

From beneath her robe the lady brought forth the broken truncheon , and
striding to the slain man , Sir Balin thrust it fiercely into his body . 

 ' Now , ' cried he aloud ,  ' with this lance thou didst treacherously slay a
good knight , and for that and all thy other cruel murders have I slain
thee . ' 

With that arose a great outcry , and men ran from the tables towards Sir
Balin to slay him , and the foremost of them was King Pellam , who rushed
towards him , crying : 

 ' Thou hast slain my brother when he bore no sword , and thou shalt
surely die . ' 

 ' Well , ' said Balin ,  ' come and do it thyself . ' 

 ' I shall do it , ' said Pellam ,  ' and no man shall touch thee but me , for
the love of my brother . ' 

Pellam snatched an axe from the hands of one standing by , and smote
eagerly at Balin; but Balin put his sword between his head and the
stroke , and the sword was struck from his hand . 

Then , weaponless , Balin dashed through the circle of guests towards a
door , looking for a weapon while he ran , but none could he find . King
Pellam followed closely behind him , and so they ran from chamber to
chamber , and up the narrow stair within the wall , until at the last
Balin found that he was near the top of the tower , and thought that now
he must surely be slain , for no weapon had he found . 

Suddenly he came upon a door , and bursting it open he found himself in
a large room marvellously bright and richly dight , and with a bed
arrayed with cloth of gold , and one old and white and reverend lying
therein . And by the side of the bed was a table of virgin gold on
pillars of pure silver , and on it stood a spear , strangely wrought . 

Balin seized the spear , and turned upon King Pellam , who stood still in
the doorway with terror in his eyes . But , marking naught of this , Balin
thrust at him with the spear , and struck it in his side , and King
Pellam with a great cry fell to the ground . 

With that stroke the walls of the castle drove together and fell in
ruins to the ground , and a great cry of lamentation beat to and fro
from far and near , and Balin lay under the stones as one dead . 

After three days Merlin came and drew out Balin from the ruins , and
nourished and healed him . He also recovered his sword and got him a
good horse , for his own was slain . Then he bade him ride out of that
country without delay . 

 ' And never more shall you have ease , ' said Merlin .  ' For by the stroke
of that spear with intent to slay King Pellam thou hast done such a
dolorous deed that not for many years shall its evil cease to work . ' 

 ' What have I done ? ' said Balin . 

 ' Thou wouldst have slain a man with the very spear that Longius the
Roman thrust into the side of our Lord Jesus when He suffered on the
Rood; and by that thou hast defiled it , and caused such ill that never
shall its tale be ended until a stainless knight shall come , one of
those who shall achieve the Holy Graal . ' 

 ' It repents me , ' said Balin heavily ,  ' but the adventure was forced upon
me . ' 

As he rode through the land , he saw how it seemed that a dire
pestilence had swept over it; for where he had seen the golden corn
waving in miles of smiling fields , he saw it now blackened along the
ground; the trees were stripped of their leaves and fruit , the cattle
lay dead in the meads , and the fish rotted in the streams , while in the
villages lay the people dead or dying in shattered or roofless
cottages . 

As he passed , those that were alive cursed him , and called down upon
him the wrath of Heaven . 

 ' See , see , ' they cried ,  ' thou murderous knight , how the evil stroke
thou gavest to King Pellam by that hallowed spear hath destroyed this
happy land ! Go ! thou foul knight , and may the vengeance strike thee
soon ! ' 

Balin went on , heavy of mind , for he knew not why he had been caused to
do this evil . 

For many days he passed through the saddened land , and he felt that in
a little while death would meet him . 

Then suddenly one day he came upon a castle in a wood , and he heard a
horn blow , as it had been at the death of a beast . 

 ' Here , ' said Balin ,  ' shall I meet my death-wound , for that blast was
blown for me . ' 

As he came on the green before the castle , many ladies and knights met
him and welcomed him with fair semblance , and gave him good cheer . 

 ' Now , ' said the lady of the castle , when he had eaten ,  ' ye must do a
joust for me with a knight hereby who hath won from me a fair island in
a stream , and he hath overcome every knight that hath essayed to win it
back for me . ' 

 ' Well , as you claim it for your good cheer , ' said Balin ,  ' I will e ' en
joust , though both I and my horse are spent with travelling , and my
heart is heavy . Nevertheless , show me the place . ' 

 ' But , sir , ' said a knight ,  ' thou shouldst change thy shield for a
bigger . For the strange knight is a strong one and a hardy . ' 

Balin cared not , and so took the shield with a device upon it that was
not his own . Then he and his horse were led to a great barge , and so
they were poled across the wide stream to an island . 

When Balin had landed and mounted his horse , he rode a little way
towards a stout tower , and from it a knight issued , his armour all in
red , and the trappings of his horse of the same colour . They couched
their lances and came marvellously fast together , and smote each other
in the midmost of their shields; and the shock of their spears was so
great that it bore down both horses and men , and for a little while the
knights were dazed . 

The stranger rose up first , for Balin was much bruised and wearied; and
the red knight drew his sword and came towards Balin , who thereupon got
upon his feet , and they fought most fiercely together . So they fought
till their breaths failed . 

Many were the bouts they fought , and they rested oftentimes , and then
to battle again , so that in a little while the grass of the sward where
they struggled was red with the blood of their wounds . 

But the more wearied they were the fiercer they fought to vanquish each
the other , so that their hauberks were in tatters , their helms were
broken , and their shields were rived and cracked . At the last the red
knight could not lift his shield for weakness , and then he went back a
little and fell down . 

Balin also sank to the ground , faint with his wounds , and as he lay he
cried out : 

 ' What knight art thou ? for ere now I never found a knight that matched
me . ' 

The other answered him faintly : 

 ' My name is Balan , brother to the good knight Balin ! ' 

 ' Alas ! ' said Balin ,  ' that ever I should see the day ! ' And therewith he
fell back in a swoon . 

Then Balan crawled on all fours , feet and hands , and put off the helm
of his brother , and might hardly know him by his face , so hewn and
stained it was . Balan wept and kissed his face , and with that Balin
awoke . 

 ' O Balan , my brother , thou hast slain me and I thee ! ' 

 ' Alas ! ' said Balan ,  ' but I knew thee not , my brother . Hadst thou had
thine own shield , I would have known thy device of the two swords . ' 

 ' Ah ,  ' twas part of the evil hap that hath followed me , ' cried Balin .  ' I
know not why . ' 

Then they both swooned , and the lady of the castle came and would have
had them taken to a chamber . But Balan awoke and said : 

 ' Let be ! let be ! No leech can mend us . And I would not live more , for I
have slain my dear brother and he me ! ' 

Balin woke up therewith , and put his hand forth , and his brother
clasped it in his , very eagerly . 

 ' Little brother , ' said Balin ,  ' I cannot come to thee--kiss me ! ' When
they had kissed , they swooned again , and in a little while Balin died , 
but Balan did not pass until midnight . 

 ' Alas ! alas ! ' cried the lady , weeping for very pity ,  ' that ever this
should be . Two brothers that have played together about their mother ' s
knees to slay each other unwittingly ! ' 

On the morrow came Merlin , and made them be buried richly in the green
place where they had fought , and on their tomb he caused to be written
in letters of gold , deep and thick , these words :  ' Here lie Sir Balin
and his brother Sir Balan , who , unwittingly , did most pitifully slay
each other : and this Sir Balin was , moreover , he that smote the
dolorous stroke . Whereof the end is not yet . ' 




III

HOW LANCELOT WAS MADE A KNIGHT . THE FOUR WITCH QUEENS , AND THE
ADVENTURES AT THE CHAPEL PERILOUS


When King Arthur was arrived at the age of twenty-five , his knights and
barons counselled that he should take a queen , and his choice fell upon
Gwenevere , the daughter of King Leodegrance , of the land of Cameliard . 
This damsel was the most beautiful and the most gracious in all the
realm of Britain . 

When the marriage was arranged between her father and Merlin , King
Leodegrance said that , for her dowry , instead of broad lands , of which
King Arthur had many , he would give to Arthur the Table Round , which
Uther Pendragon had in friendship given to him many years before . For , 
as King Arthur was already famous for his prowess and nobleness and his
love of knightly men and brave deeds , Leodegrance knew that this would
be a gift beloved of Arthur . 

With the table were to go the knights who were its company . It seated
one hundred and fifty when it was complete , but many had been slain , 
and now they numbered but a hundred . 

When King Arthur heard from Merlin of the coming of Gwenevere , with the
hundred knights bearing the Round Table with them , he was very glad , 
 ' for , ' said he ,  ' their noble company pleaseth me more than great
riches . ' He charged Merlin to go and espy through all the land of
Britain for another fifty knights , so that the tale of the noble
company of the Round Table should be complete . 

Now , it chanced that while Arthur sat in the hall of his palace at
London , waiting for Gwenevere to come to him , and for Merlin to return
from his quest , King Ban , who had aided him in his fierce battle
against the eleven kings , sent his young son Lancelot to Arthur ' s
court , to learn knightly deeds and noble prowess . 

None knew who he was but Arthur , who kept the matter secret . Many had
smiled at the huge limbs of Lancelot , until his great strength had
caused them to respect him; and being but a young man he had not yet
got all the courtly bearing and noble manners for which in later time
he was famous throughout all Christendom . So that many knights and
ladies smiled sourly upon him , but others saw that he would shortly
prove a fine man of his hands , full courteous and gentle , and of a
noble nature and great presence . 

At the court was also young Gawaine , son of King Lot , and nephew of the
king . Both Lancelot and Gawaine were as yet not knighted , but together
they tilted at each other in the lists beyond the walls , and spent
their days in sword-play and all knightly exercises . Lancelot was the
stronger and the better fighter; and though Gawaine never overcame him , 
yet did they twain love each other passing well . 

Now Gawaine went to the king one day , and asked of him a gift , and King
Arthur said he would grant it . 

 ' Sir , ' said Gawaine , while Lancelot stood a little way off , fondling
the hounds that licked at his hand ,  ' I ask that ye will make me knight
the same day that ye shall wed fair Gwenevere . ' 

 ' I will do it with a good will , ' said the king .  ' And Lancelot , ' he
said , calling to the young man ,  ' have ye no boon to ask of me ? ' 

 ' Not at this time , sir , ' replied Lancelot ,  ' but in a little while I
may . ' 

Into the hall next day , as the king sat at dinner , came an old woman , 
bent and feeble , but with reverend white hair and gentle face , and she
kneeled at the king ' s feet . 

 ' What is it , dame ? ' said Arthur .  ' What is ' t you crave ? ' 

 ' Justice , lord king , ' she said in a weak voice , while the tears gushed
from her eyes .  ' Or else I die beside the gate where you do give the
justice that all men praise . ' 

 ' Who hath done evil to you ? ' said the king . 

 ' Sir Caradoc of the Dolorous Tower in the Marsh , ' replied the old
woman .  ' I and my son , lord , did build a little hut of wattle on a
little plot which we banked from the marsh , near the great wall of the
rich baron , deeming it safe to rest within the shadow of the strong
lord , and though his hard rule was hateful to those whom he oppressed , 
we were so humble that we thought he would not notice us . And meagrely
we reared our living from the ground , and sold our poor herbs to Sir
Caradoc his steward , or to the people in the villages in the marsh
about us . But soon the Lord Caradoc desired the land on which our
little hut was standing , to make his lands the broader . He tore our
poor home down , and scattered all , and thrust us out to wander in the
marshes; and when my poor son pleaded with the lord , he had him
whipped , and he was brought and cast half dead at my feet as I waited
outside the hall . Now if thou givest us not justice , we shall surely
die . ' 

 ' Doth any know Sir Caradoc ? ' asked the king of his knights . 

 ' Yea , sir , ' said one ,  ' and he is a great man of his hands , fierce and
bold , of strong family , and his brother is Sir Turquine of Camber , who
tried to slay thee at Caerleon , and was with the eleven kings in
battle . Sir Caradoc liveth in a strong tower beyond the marshes to the
south of the river , and he slayeth all that desire to pass them , unless
they pay him all he demands . ' 

 ' What ! ' said the king with fierce anger ,  ' within a few miles of this my
justice-seat doth such tyranny rule unchecked , and ye tell me naught of
it ? Are ye then more fearful of this marsh robber than of me your
king ? ' 

The knights hung their heads abashed , and were silent . 

Then Lancelot came and stood before the king . 

 ' Let me , sir king , go and summon this tyrant to your presence , ' he
said ,  ' so that this poor dame may have justice , and that ye may punish
him for his oppression . ' 

 ' I fear me , Lancelot , thou art over young for so fierce a knight , ' said
Arthur . 

 ' I shall but bear thy words , sir , ' said Lancelot , and he will not harm
thy messenger . ' 

 ' Take two stout men-at-arms with you , then , ' said Arthur ,  ' and say to
this Sir Caradoc that if he come not back with thee to answer unto me , 
I will come and take his life and burn his evil tower to the ground . ' 

Many of the younger men that had despite against Lancelot for his
greater prowess at the sword and the lance thought that now , indeed , 
they would be ridded of him , for they deemed Sir Caradoc would slay
him . 

Two days later came young Lancelot back with his two men-at-arms , and
with them , bound upon a great horse , was a full fierce and raging
knight , red of face , large of body , his clothes all tossed and torn , 
and his mouth full of dire threatenings against Lancelot . Men made way
for them marvelling , and together Lancelot and his captive rode up the
hall to the king . 

 ' Here , lord , is Sir Caradoc of the Dolorous Tower in the Marsh , ' said
Lancelot .  ' He would not come when I gave him your message , so I bided
my time until he was sunk in wine , and was sleeping alone , and I have
brought him secretly from his hold . Now , lord king , I think Sir Caradoc
would joust with me , if you will give me knighthood . ' 

 ' Joust with thee , thou smooth-faced boy ! ' cried Sir Caradoc , straining
at his bonds .  ' I will spit thee on my lance if I may get at thee , and
when thou art slain I will fight with this little king of thine--and
his death shall wipe out this insult thou hast put upon me ! ' 

At his rage and fierce bearing men marvelled and many were afeared , 
seeing that Sir Caradoc was great in lands and kinsmen , and big of his
body . 

 ' Thou art full young , Lancelot , ' said Arthur ,  ' to joust with so strong
a knight . Let an older man have ado with him . ' 

 ' Sir king , ' cried Lancelot eagerly ,  ' I claim the first battle with this
strong tyrant . He is my captive , and I claim it . ' 

 ' Have it as ye will , ' said Arthur ,  ' and God speed you . But I misdoubt
me much  ' twill end in your sorrow . ' 

 ' Ay , and thine too , thou gentle lady ' s knight ! ' sneered Sir Caradoc . 

 ' Peace , man , peace , ' said the king sternly .  ' I think God will fight in
this battle , for I have inquired far , and the tale of thy evil deeds is
over-full . ' 

Therewith King Arthur made young Lancelot knight , and men eagerly
rushed away to the tilting-ground to see the battle between the virgin
knight , Sir Lancelot , and the old robber knight , Sir Caradoc . And when
Sir Caradoc was released and armed , he laughed and shook his lance , so
sure was he of revenge right speedily . 

Then they hurtled together most fiercely , and young Sir Lancelot was
thrust from his horse by Sir Caradoc . Quickly he rose from the ground , 
and dressed his shield and drew his sword , and cried ,  ' Alight , Sir
Caradoc , for I will fight thee on foot . ' But Sir Caradoc , being
traitorous , rode at Sir Lancelot with his spear , as if he would pin him
to the earth , and the young knight had much ado to avoid him . All the
knights cried out upon Sir Caradoc for a foul knight , and for shame he
threw down his lance and alighted , and rushed at Sir Lancelot full
fiercely , in order to slay him instantly . 

But that was not easily to be done , for however wise Sir Caradoc was in
sword-play , he was mad with wrath , and therefore thought of naught but
to slay his enemy instantly . He raged like a wild boar , and gave Sir
Lancelot many evil strokes , yet never did he beat down the young
knight ' s guard . Soon men perceived that Sir Caradoc ' s great fierceness
was causing him to make blind strokes , and then Sir Lancelot seemed the
more wary . Suddenly they saw the young knight leap forward , and beat so
heavily upon the other ' s helm that it cracked . Sir Caradoc strove to
guard himself , but Sir Lancelot was so wroth , and so mighty of his
blows , that he could not . At last Sir Lancelot beat him to his knees , 
and then thrust him grovelling to the ground . Sir Lancelot bade him
yield , but he would not , and still sought to thrust at the other . Then
the young knight struck at him between the neck and the head and slew
him . 

Both the knights and the common people shouted with joy , and acclaimed
Sir Lancelot as a noble and mighty knight . But the young man was full
modest , and withdrew from the press . King Arthur gave unto him the
Dolorous Tower and the lands which had belonged to Sir Caradoc , and
Lancelot caused the old dame and her son to be given a fair piece of
land and a hut , and many other wrongs and evil customs that had been
done by Sir Caradoc , Sir Lancelot caused to be righted . 

The kinsmen of Sir Caradoc went apart and conspired to have Sir
Lancelot slain , but for a long time they could not come at him . 

Then , when the queen came unto King Arthur , there was great feasting
and joustings and merry games , and Sir Lancelot , for his knightly
prowess in the lists , and for his gentle courtesy and noble manners to
all , both poor and rich , high and low , was sought by many , and for some
time rested himself in knightly games and play . 

Then , on a day in June , when a sudden wind from a lattice blew upon his
face as he laughed and jested with ladies and knights in silks and rich
garments , he bethought him of the fair green woods and the wide lands
through which lonely roads were winding . And departing from the hall
forthwith , he bade his horse and arms be brought to him , and rode into
a deep forest , and thought to prove himself in strange adventures . 

Thus faring , he rode for two days and met with naught . On the third day
the weather was hot about noon , and Sir Lancelot had great list to
sleep . He espied a great apple-tree full of white blossoms , and a fair
shadow was beneath it , and he alighted and tied his horse unto a thorn , 
and laid his helmet under his head and slept . 

While he thus lay , there rode by him on white mules four ladies of
great estate , with four knights about them , who bore a canopy of green
silk on four spears , so that the high sun should not touch the faces of
the ladies . Then , as they rode by , they heard a war-horse grimly neigh , 
and looking aside , they were aware of Sir Lancelot all armed , and
asleep under the apple-tree . 

The ladies came nigh him , and of them there was Queen Morgan le Fay , 
who was wife of King Lot , and an evil witch; the Queen of Northgales , a
haughty lady; the Lady of the Out-Isles; and the Lady of the Marshes . 
And when the Lady of the Marshes saw the knight she cried : 

 ' Now this is as good hap as ever could be , for this is he that slew my
brother , Sir Caradoc of the Dolorous Tower; and for revenge of that , I
would have this knight taken to my tower and torture him before I slay
him . ' 

 ' That is well said , ' said Morgan le Fay ,  ' for he bids fair to be one of
the most strong knights of Arthur , whom I hate . This man , Sir Lancelot
du Lake , is the favourite of all the ladies at that court , who hate me . 
So will I lay an enchantment on him , so that he shall sleep . ' 

Then the evil queen laid her hands over the face of Sir Lancelot , and
said strange words that none could understand , and then he was laid
across the crupper of one of the knights ' horses , and he did not wake . 

When in the twilight Sir Lancelot awoke , he found himself on a straw
pallet in a strange room , and he leaped up and went to a narrow
arrow-slit in the wall and looked out . Before him for a great distance
was a black watery land , with the sun sinking far away on the very
edge , and the pools of the marsh were as if they were of blood . 

Then he beat at the door and called , but none responded , and for wrath
he could have dashed the door down , but it was too stout , and he had no
weapon; for his arms had been taken from him . 

When it was dark , suddenly it seemed to Sir Lancelot that the room
smelled foul , as if he had been carried into the midst of the quaking
marsh , and was sunk deep in the slime and weeds of a pool . Then , 
through the arrow-slit , he saw many strange lights come , dim and blue
like the wild lights that dance and flit over the lonely marshes by
night; but that which made him marvel was that these lights were two
together , as if they were the eyes of evil things . And they came up to
him with a breath that was cold and dank , and they seemed to peer into
his face , but he could see naught of their bodies . The hair upon his
head rose , and his skin went cold . They pressed all about him , and to
defend himself he struck at the eyes , but his blows beat only the air . 
Then suddenly Sir Lancelot felt sharp pains , as if small keen knives
had been thrust into his flesh at many places . The stabs increased in
number and in pain , and Sir Lancelot beat about himself and ran to and
fro in the narrow chamber to escape the evil eyes and the stabs , but it
was in vain , and thus all night in much misery he suffered . When for
sheer weariness he lay down and tried to close his eyes , the evil
things would not let him , but ever they tore at him and stabbed him . He
was in anguish of mind more than he could bear , and for all his thought
he could not think of any way to fight against the evil powers which
followed and tortured him wherever he ran . 

But at dawn they fled , and then the door of the room opened , and a
damsel appeared , and in her hands was a manchet of sour bread , and a
beaker of water from the ditch of the moat . The damsel was evilly clad
in rags , and seemed like a scullion-maid . 

 ' These , ' she said ,  ' my mistresses bid me say shall be your food until
you die . ' 

 ' Damsel , ' said Lancelot ,  ' tell me who hath brought me here and used me
so evilly . ' 

 ' It is Queen Morgan le Fay , ' said the damsel ,  ' and the three witch
queens , the Queen of Northgales , the Queen of the Out-Isles , and the
Lady of the Marshes . ' 

 ' I doubt not , then , that they would slay me ? ' said Lancelot .  ' But why
hate they me ? ' 

 ' It is for this , ' went on the damsel ,  ' that you did slay Sir Caradoc , 
the brother of the Lady of the Marshes . ' 

 ' Alas , then , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' there is no pity for me , and none of
my dear friends shall learn of my shameful death . ' 

 ' And so that you should suffer much ere you are slain , ' went on the
damsel ,  ' they sent in the night the Coranians , the marsh fiends , to
torture you . Thus will they do until you die , unless , sir knight , you
are a knight with a stout heart , and a good fighter , and will do me
justice . If you will be ruled by me , and will give me a promise , I will
aid you . ' 

 ' Damsel , that will I grant you , ' said Lancelot ,  ' for this would be an
evil death for a knight . And full of terror hath been this night , from
the foul things which have beset me . ' 

 ' I may not stay further now , ' said the maid ,  ' lest they think I tarry
over-long . But by evening I will come again . ' 

The day passed and twilight came , and Sir Lancelot was adread for fear
of the night . But anon the damsel came secretly to him and said : 

 ' Now must you promise me this , that you will release my father , whom
Sir Turquine , Sir Caradoc ' s brother , hath kept in his foul dungeons
since I was but a little child . And all his lands did Sir Turquine rob
from him , and me he gave as a kitchen slut to Morgan le Fay , and evilly
have I been treated who am a good knight ' s daughter . Now , will ye
promise to free my father ? ' 

 ' That will I , my poor damsel , ' said Lancelot ,  ' and I will , God aiding
me , slay this Sir Turquine as I slew Sir Caradoc his brother . ' 

So at the dead of night the damsel opened his door , and with the keys
that she had stolen , she opened twelve other locks that stood between
them and the postern door . Then she brought him to his armour , which
she had hidden in a bush , and she led forth his horse , and he mounted
with much joy , and took the maid with him , and she showed him the way
to a convent of white nuns , and there they had good cheer . 

Then , on the morrow , she led him to a thick forest with many hills
therein , and anon they came to a fair ford , and over the ford there
grew a tree , and on it there hung many good shields , each with the
device of some knight thereon , and Sir Lancelot was astounded to see
the shields of many of King Arthur ' s knights hung there . And on a bole
of the tree there was a bason of copper . 

 ' Now , ' said the damsel ,  ' I have brought you here where is Sir Turquine , 
the mightiest knight that ever was found , as men say , and was never
overmatched by any . And in his dungeons are many poor knights , and my
dear father , Sir Darrel . Now strike the bason with the butt of your
spear . ' 

Sir Lancelot beat such strokes that the bason burst asunder , and then
he was aware of a great knight riding on a black horse .  ' This is he , ' 
said the damsel ,  ' and now God aid you ! ' 

 ' What needst thou , sir knight ? ' cried the other . 

 ' To try my strength on thee , ' cried Lancelot ,  ' for thou hast done great
despite and shame unto many good knights of the Round Table . ' 

 ' Art thou of that caitiff crew of ladies ' knights ? ' sneered Sir
Turquine .  ' Then I defy thee . ' 

 ' Thou hast said enough , ' replied Lancelot . 

They put their spears in their rests , and came like the wind against
each other , and either smote other in the middle of their shields , so
that both their horses ' girths broke . Then , lightly avoiding their
beasts , they came at each other with great fierceness , and so fared for
two hours , feinting and striking , and so heavy were their blows that
each bled from many wounds as they stood . At last , for sheer
breathlessness , each leaned upon his sword . 

 ' Now , fellow , ' said Sir Turquine haughtily ,  ' answer me these questions
I shall put to thee . ' 

 ' Say on , ' said Sir Lancelot . 

 ' Thou art , ' went on Sir Turquine ,  ' the biggest man that ever I met
with , and like one knight that I hate above all others , and I would
liefer be thy friend than thy foe . Now , therefore , I will give up to
thee my captive knights if thou wilt tell me thy name , and if thou art
not the knight I hate most . ' 

 ' Willingly , ' said Sir Lancelot .  ' But what knight hatest thou above all
other ? And why ? ' 

 ' It is Sir Lancelot du Lake , ' cried the knight ,  ' for he slew my brother
Sir Caradoc of the Dolorous Tower in the Marsh , who was one of the best
knights living . And ever I have sought this Lancelot , and slain and
maimed many good knights and imprisoned others in the quest . To slay
that fellow I have made a vow , and him I would meet above all others . ' 

 ' Ha ! ' laughed Sir Lancelot ,  ' and I am the first thou hast met whose
love thou wouldst liefer have than my hatred ? Well , I will have thee to
wit that I am he ye seek , Sir Lancelot du Lake , and thy brother was an
evil knight and an oppressor . ' 

 ' What sayest thou ? ' cried Sir Turquine .  ' Thou art he I seek ? Then , 
Lancelot , thou art unto me most welcome as ever was any knight , for we
shall never part till the one of us be dead . ' 

Then they ran at each other like two wild boars , lashing and dashing
with their swords and shields , so that sometimes in their fury they
slipped together on the grass , which was wetted with blood , and fell
striking at each other . But at last Sir Turquine waxed faint and tried
to avoid Sir Lancelot ' s blows , and his shield sank low , for his arm was
very weary . Seeing this , Sir Lancelot leaped upon him fiercely , and got
him by the banner of his helmet , and thrust him on his knees , and slew
him at a stroke . 

When he had rested a while , he went to the castle of Sir Turquine and
released all his prisoners , and was rejoiced to see the damsel find her
father alive . He caused the old knight to have his lands again , and
bade the others that they should betake themselves to the court of King
Arthur to be cheered and comforted , while their possessions , which Sir
Turquine had robbed of them , should be given back to them . 

Then fared Sir Lancelot further afield , glad exceedingly that he had
escaped the foul plots of the four witch queens , and also that he had
vanquished the evil Sir Turquine . 

Then he rode a great while in a deep and dark forest , and as he
followed the winding ways , suddenly he saw a black hound before him , 
with its nose to the ground as if seeking a scent . He followed the
beast , and ever she looked behind her . Soon she left the forest , and
picked her way through a great marsh , and Sir Lancelot followed , until
in the wide distance he saw a little hill with trees upon it , and in
the midst a ruined manor . 

The hound went towards the ruin and Sir Lancelot followed . The wall was
broken down in many places , and the path all overgrown and weedy , and
as he came to the courtyard before the house , he saw the fishponds
choked with weeds and the horseblock green with moss , and in the great
doorway grew charnel and hellebore , and the spiked hemlock waved and
spilt its seed in the wind . The windows hung by their hinges , and the
green moss crept down the wide wet cracks in the walls . 

But the dog ran over the drawbridge into the house , and Sir Lancelot
gat from his horse and tethered it to the post beside the horseblock , 
and so went across the bridge , which was full sodden and worm-eaten , 
and bent beneath his weight . 

Coming into a great hall , foul with many rotting leaves , he saw a table
in the midst thereof , and on it was a knight that was a seemly man , and
he lay as if he were dead , and the black hound licked his wound . And by
his side there was a lovely lady , who started up , weeping and wringing
her hands , and she said : 

 ' O knight , too much evil have you brought to me ! ' 

 ' Why say ye so ? ' said Sir Lancelot;  ' I never did harm to this knight , 
for hither did this hound lead me , and therefore , fair lady , be not
displeased with me , for grief is upon me for your sorrow and your
sadness . ' 

 ' Truly , sir , ' said the lady , and she laid her face in her hands and
sobbed full sorely , so that Sir Lancelot was much stirred thereat ,  ' I
trow , as ye say it , that you are not the knight that hath near slain my
love and my husband . And never may he be healed of his deadly wound
except some good knight aid me . But he must be so bold and valiant a
man , that never , I think , may I find such a one in the little time I
have before my dear lord shall die ! ' 

 ' Now on the honour of my knighthood , ' replied Sir Lancelot ,  ' I do not
presume that I am such a one as you desire; but if I may aid you and
ease your sorrow , that would I do most willingly . What is it I should
do ? ' 

 ' Oh , sir knight ! ' cried the lady , and her lovely eyes looked full
thankfully at Sir Lancelot ,  ' if ye would , it were the greatest deed you
have ever done , however bold a knight ye may be . For this my lord is
sore wounded by a knight whom he met in the forest this day , and by one
thing only may he be made whole . For there is a lady , a sorceress , that
dwelleth in a castle here beside , and she hath told me that my
husband ' s wounds may never be whole till I may find a knight that would
go at midnight into the Chapel Perilous beside the Mere , and that
therein he should find before the high altar a sword , and the shroud in
which the dead wizard-knight is lapped , and with that sword my
husband ' s wounds should be searched , and a piece of the shroud should
bind them . ' 

 ' This is a marvellous thing , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' and I will essay it . 
But what is your husband ' s name ? ' 

 ' Sir , ' she said ,  ' his name is Sir Meliot de Logres . ' 

 ' That me repenteth , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' for he is a fellow of the
Round Table , and for him will I do all in my power . ' 

Going to the table , he looked upon the ashen face of the wounded man , 
and it was Sir Meliot , even as the lady said . 

 ' Now , sir , ' said the lady , when Sir Lancelot had mounted his horse ,  ' do
ye follow that hard way across the marsh , and it will lead ye by
midnight to the Chapel Perilous , and may ye speed well . ' 

Right so , Sir Lancelot departed , and the sun was near its setting . 

For some hours Sir Lancelot fared across the marsh , until it was deep
night , save for the stars; then he came upon a broad road , grass-grown
and banked high , where the night wind piped in the long grass . This he
knew was a road which the great Roman necromancers had wrought , and he
thought he had missed his way , for there was no other path . 

As he stood marvelling , the figure of a man , tall and gaunt and but
half clad , came down the broad road towards him , and cried in a hollow
voice : 

 ' For the love of charity , sir knight , give to a poor man who is
outcast . ' 

Sir Lancelot pitied the sunken eyes of the poor man , and gave him alms . 

 ' God give thee comfort , poor soul , ' said the knight ,  ' and get thee a
roof , for the night wind blows chill . ' 

 ' God bless thee , sir knight , ' said the man , in awful tones ,  ' for
courtesy and pity such as thine are rare . Whither goest thou this
night ? ' 

 ' I seek the Chapel Perilous , ' said Sir Lancelot . 

At which the shape threw back its head and cried out as if with great
sorrow . 

 ' God fend thee , sir knight , ' he said ,  ' and bring thee safe alive . What
thou gettest there , keep thou in thy hands until the dawn , or thy soul
shall suffer death . ' 

Then he vanished , and Sir Lancelot knew it had been a phantom . 

Then as he crossed himself , he looked up , and through some thin and
withered trees a little way off upon a slope he saw the shimmer of
light , as if a chapel was lit up . He went towards it , and he saw a high
wall that was broken down in many places , and an old grey chapel
beyond , and the windows were shimmering with a ghostly light . As he
came through the trees he saw they were all dead , with neither leaf nor
twig upon them , their roots were crooked out of the ground as if they
would throw his horse , and their limbs were stretched as if they
strained to clutch him . 

Coming to the gate in the wall , his horse trembled and plunged , and
would go no further; whereat Sir Lancelot alighted , and tied it to a
thorn-tree , and went through the gate . By the ghostly light that came
from the windows of the ruined chapel he saw that under the eaves were
hung fair shields , with rich devices , and all were turned upside down . 
Many of them were those of knights he had known or heard of , long since
dead or lost . When he had made a few steps on the grass-grown pathway
towards the door , of a sudden he saw , coming from the church , thirty
tall knights , each a foot higher than he , each in black armour , and
each with sword uplifted , as they rushed towards him . 

Their feet and their armour made no sound as they pressed forwards , and
a thin blue flame licked about each naked sword . 

They came upon him , but Sir Lancelot , with a prayer to God , dressed his
shield and sword and stood firm , though his flesh quaked and his tongue
clave to the roof of his mouth . They mowed and gnashed at him , and
heaved their swords about him; then suddenly their vizors went up and
he looked into their faces . And at that he was sore adread , for he knew
they were dead men . 

But he would not be overcome , and said in a loud voice : 

 ' In the name of God , avaunt ye ! ' 

He made a step forward , and they scattered before him , but followed
closely behind . Then he went into the chapel , where he saw no light but
a dim lamp burning upon the altar . It was an old , old chapel , with dust
upon its floor like a thick carpet , the walls and windows were holed
and broken , and the timber of the seats was rotten . 

He went up to the high altar , and saw before it a trestle , and upon it
was a dead man , all covered with a cloth of silk . Sir Lancelot stooped
down , and with his sword cut a piece of that cloth away . 

With that his blood seemed turned to water , and his feet seemed eager
to run towards the door , for with a mighty roar the earth shook beneath
him , and the walls of the chapel rocked . But he looked for the sword
which he must take , and saw it under the trestle , and picked it up and
went out of the chapel . 

The ghosts of the knights pressed about him as he walked , and strove to
tear the sword from his grasp . But he would not suffer them to take it , 
and when he reached the gate they could no further go , and so left him . 

At the gate there came running up to him a fair damsel , crying to him : 

 ' O brave knight , give me the sword and the cloth , that I may take them
at once to my mistress , the lady of Sir Meliot , for he is at the point
of death , and she is waiting in sorrow and tears beside him . ' 

But Sir Lancelot remembered the words of the phantom beggar , and made
reply : 

 ' Fair damsel , I shall take them myself to the lady of Sir Meliot , for
these things I may not give to any until the dawning . ' 

The damsel would have torn the sword and the cloth full hastily from
his hands , but he was aware of her intent , and hindered her , and bade
her in the name of God to withdraw . 

Whereat , with a great shriek , she vanished . 

 ' Now , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' may God , who has brought me through these
evil adventures , shield me from any further subtle crafts of these foul
things . ' 

Straightway he mounted his horse , and took his way towards the marsh , 
so that he should give the sword and the cloth into the hands of the
lady of Sir Meliot , for the healing of her lord . 

But at the dawn Merlin met him . 

 ' Sir Lancelot , ' said the old white wizard ,  ' ye have no need to go to
the ruined manor , except ye would have the proof of what I tell you . ' 

 ' And what is that ? ' asked Sir Lancelot . 

 ' That all that hath befallen thee hath been done by evil magic , ' 
replied Merlin .  ' The black dog that led thee to the manor was a fiend , 
the fair lady that entreated ye was an evil witch , and she and the
damsel at the chapel were the same , and all was caused by the witch
queens who had you in their tower; and the likeness of the wounded
knight to Sir Meliot was formed by wizardry . They that craved your
death did hope that ye would fail at the terrors of the Chapel
Perilous , and that your soul would be lost as have the souls of those
evil or weak knights whose ghosts assailed ye . But by your courage and
great heart ye won through all . ' 

 ' This is a great marvel , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' and I thank God that He
hath shielded me of His mercy . ' 

When Sir Lancelot was returned to Camelot , and Merlin had told King
Arthur of the knight ' s adventures , the king made him one of the knights
of the Round Table . 

 ' Ye do well , ' said Merlin privily unto the king ,  ' for he shall prove
the most man of worship that is in the world , and all your court and
all your Round Table shall be by him made more famous than by any
knight now living . Yet shall he not be one of those three that shall
achieve the Holy Graal . ' 


