King Arthur was spending Whitsuntide at Caerleon-upon-Usk , and one day
he hunted the stag in the forests that lay thereby . As he had given
permission for his queen to go and see the hunting , she set out with
one handmaiden , and rode in the misty dawning down to the river , and
across the ford . 

They climbed up the other bank , following the track of the men and
horses which had formed the king ' s hunting party , until they stood on
the edge of the dark forest , where the young leaves were fresh and
sweetly green . The sun burst forth , and sucked up the mists along the
meadow flats beside the river below them , and the water flashed and the
birds sang . 

 ' Here will we stay , ' said the queen , who felt happy with the sunlight
upon her , and the smell of the forest blowing out from the trees ,  ' and
though we shall not see the killing , we shall hear the horns when they
sound , and we shall hear the dogs when they are let loose and begin to
cry so eagerly . ' 

Suddenly they heard a rushing sound and the thud of hoofs behind them , 
and , turning , they saw a young man upon a hunter foal of mighty size . 
The rider was a fair-haired handsome youth , of princely mien , yet
withal kindly of look and smile . A riding-robe and surcoat of satin
were upon him , low-cut shoes of soft leather were on his feet , and in
his girdle was a golden-hilted sword . A fillet of gold bound his curly
hair , and a collar of gold , with a blue enamel swastika pendant , hung
about his neck . 

He checked his horse as he neared the queen , and it came towards her
with step stately , swift and proud , and the rider bowed full low to
Gwenevere . 

 ' Heaven prosper thee , Sir Geraint , ' she said .  ' And its welcome be unto
thee . ' 

 ' Heaven accord you long life and happiness , O queen , ' replied Geraint . 

 ' Why didst thou not go with my lord to hunt ? ' asked the queen . 

 ' Because I knew not when he went , ' said Geraint .  ' But men told me in
hall that you had gone out alone , and I came to crave permission to
accompany and guard you . ' 

 ' Gramercy , ' said the queen .  ' Thy protection is very agreeable to me . ' 

As they stood talking , they heard the clatter of steel armour , and
looking between the trees , they beheld a proud knight upon a war-horse
of great size , wearing a heavy chain-mail jesseraunt , with coif and
vizored helm , and his horse was also clothed in harness of chain mail . 

Following him was a lady upon a beautiful white horse , which went with
stately and proud steps along the forest way . The lady was clothed in a
great robe of gold brocade , and her headcloth , of fine cambric , was
turned so that her face was hidden . Behind them rode a little dark man , 
hairy and fierce of face , dressed as a page; and he sat on a great
horse , strong and spirited , yet the dwarf held it well in hand . Hung to
his saddle-bow was the knight ' s shield , but the device was hidden by a
cloth , and two lances were fixed to the girdle of the dwarf . In his
right fist the page carried a whip , long and heavy and knotted . 

 ' Sir Geraint , ' said Gwenevere ,  ' knowest thou the name of that tall
knight ? ' 

 ' I know him not , lady , ' said Geraint ,  ' and his helm conceals his face , 
and his shield is also hidden . But I will go and ask the page , that you
may learn his name . ' 

And Sir Geraint rode up to the dwarfish page . 

 ' Who is yonder knight ? ' said Sir Geraint . 

 ' I will not tell thee , ' replied the dwarf , and scowled . 

 ' Then I will ask him himself , ' said Sir Geraint . 

 ' That thou wilt not , by my head , ' said the dwarf angrily ,  ' for thou art
not of honour enough to speak to my lord . ' 

Geraint turned his horse ' s head to go towards the knight , whereupon the
dwarf spurred forward and overtook him and lashed towards him with the
long and knotted whip . The lash struck the mouth of Sir Geraint , and
blood flowed , and dropped upon the silken scarf that he wore . 

Instantly Sir Geraint turned , with sword half drawn , and the dwarf
cowed and pulled back . But Sir Geraint thought it would be no vengeance
to carve the dwarf ' s head from his shoulders , and to be attacked
unarmed by the mail-clad knight . 

He thrust his sword back with a clang into its scabbard , and rode
towards the queen . 

 ' Thou hast acted wisely and nobly , Sir Geraint , ' said the queen ,  ' and I
sorrow for the insult the craven knave hath placed upon thee . ' 

 ' Lady , I fear he was but copying his master , ' said Geraint , whose eyes
flashed with anger .  ' But if your ladyship will permit me , I will follow
this knight , and at last he will come to some town where I may get arms
either as a loan or from a friend , and then will I avenge the insult
which this stranger knight hath given to you , my queen and lady . ' 

 ' Go , ' said Gwenevere ,  ' but I beg of thee , do not encounter with the
knight until thou hast good arms , for he is a man almost as big as Sir
Lancelot du Lake . And I shall be anxious concerning thee until thou
dost return , or send tidings . ' 

 ' If I be alive , ' said Sir Geraint ,  ' you shall hear tidings of me by
to-morrow at evensong . ' 

Thus he departed . All that day Sir Geraint followed the knight and the
lady and the page , keeping them in sight , though at a distance . Through
the forest they went first , and thereafter the road ran along a ridge
of high ground , with the great downs and combes falling and heaving
below their feet , the sun flashing back from lakes and streams , the
bees humming at the flowers in the grass , and the larks rising with
thrilling song in the warm sweet air of the spring . 

Sir Geraint loved it all , but he kept his eyes ever on the knight , who
flashed as he moved far before him . At length he saw the towers of a
high castle , and beneath it the red roofs of a little town nestling at
the foot of the grey walls . They rode into the town , and as the haughty
knight passed through it the people in the booths and cabins and those
beside the way saluted him . He did not acknowledge any of their
greetings , but looked before him proudly , as he had done when he rode
through the solitary paths of the wilderness . 

Sir Geraint looked about him as he rode behind , to see if there was any
armourer or knightly person whom he knew , but there was none . When he
saw the knight and the lady and the dwarf enter the castle , and was
sure that they would sojourn there , he rode about the little town , and
found it full of knights and squires , with armourers and others
cleaning arms , sharpening swords and repairing harness . But no one did
he know of whom to beg a suit of armour and a lance . 

Then he took his way to a little stream beneath the wall of the town , 
and on the other side he saw a manor-house , old and ruinous , standing
amidst tall weeds . And thinking he might get lodging there for that
night , he forded the river and went towards the manor . He saw that the
hall-door yawned open , and that a marble bridge led up to it , over a
wide ditch full of stagnant water and thick with green weeds and
rushes . 

On the bridge sat an old and reverend man in clothes that once had been
rich , but now were thin and tattered . And Geraint thought it was not
possible that so poor a place could help him in what he desired . He
looked steadfastly at the old man . 

 ' Young sir , ' said the latter ,  ' why art thou so thoughtful ? ' 

 ' I was thinking , fair sir , ' said Geraint ,  ' whether thou couldst give me
lodging here for this night . ' 

 ' Of a surety , ' said the old man , rising .  ' It is poor we are , but such
as can be given shall be of our best . ' 

He led Sir Geraint into the hall , which was bleak and desolate , and the
hearthstone in the centre was thick with last year ' s leaves , as if it
had been long since fire had flickered upon it . On the wall there hung
rusty weapons and helms , and through the cracks there crept the ivy
from the outer wall . The horse was tethered in the hall by the old man . 

Then he led Sir Geraint to a door upon the dais , and ushered him into
the bower , and there he saw an old decrepit woman , sweet of look though
thin and peaked . She rose from the cushion on which she sat , greeting
him kindly , and he saw that the satin garments upon her were also old
and tattered . Yet Sir Geraint thought she must have been a lovely woman
in her happy youth . 

Beside her was a maiden , upon whom was a vest and robe poor and thin , 
and the veil of her headcloth was old though clean . Yet truly , thought
Geraint , he had never seen a lovelier maiden , nor one with more
sweetness and grace in her smile or gentleness in her voice . And the
heart of him stirred with pity to see her so pale and wan , as if she
fared but poorly . 

 ' Welcome , fair sir , ' said the old dame .  ' This is my daughter Enid , who
will gladly prepare food for you . ' 

When food had been prepared they sat down , and Geraint was placed
between the white-haired man and his wife , and the maiden served them . 

Afterwards , as they drank weak mead from cups of earthenware , they
spoke together; and Geraint asked whose was the manor in which they
sat . 

 ' Mine , ' said the old man ,  ' for I built it . And the castle up there and
the town were also mine . ' 

 ' Alas ! ' said Geraint ,  ' how is it you and yours have lost them ? ' 

 ' For my sins and my greed , ' said the old man sadly ,  ' and bitterly have
I repented me of my wrong . I am Earl Inewl , but I have lost the lands
that made my earldom . For I have a nephew , whom his father , on his
deathbed , gave into my keeping , with all his lands . And I added his
possessions to my own , and when the boy was a man he demanded them of
me , and I would not give them up . So he made war upon me , and took
everything from me except this ruined hall and one poor farm . ' 

 ' Since you are sorry for the greed that hath ruined you , ' replied
Geraint ,  ' I will do what I may to regain your possessions , if God gives
me life . But first I would ask , why went that knight and the lady and
the dwarf just now into the town , and why is there so much furbishing
of arms there ? ' 

 ' The preparations are for the jousting that is to be held to-morrow ' s
morn in the level meadow beside the ford , ' responded the old earl .  ' And
the prize is to be a falcon of pure gold . The knight thou sawest has
won the falcon two years running , and if he wins it this time he will
have it for his own , and will win the title of the Knight of the Golden
Falcon . And to gain it from him all those knights in the town will
essay . And with each will go the lady that he loveth best , and if a man
takes not his lady with him he may not enter the lists . ' 

 ' Sir , ' said Sir Geraint ,  ' I would willingly have to do with that
knight , for he hath , by the hands of his dwarf page , most evilly
insulted the queen of my dear lord , King Arthur; but I have no armour . ' 

 ' As for that , ' said the old man ,  ' I have arms here that will fit thee;
but if thou hast no maiden with thee , thou canst not do battle . ' 

 ' If , sir , ' replied Sir Geraint ,  ' you and this maiden , your daughter , 
will permit me to challenge for her , I will engage , if I escape alive
from the tournament , to be the maiden ' s knight while I shall live . ' 

 ' What say you , daughter ? ' said the old earl . 

 ' Indeed , sir , ' replied the maiden , gently flushing ,  ' I am in your
hands . And if this fair knight will have it so , he may challenge for
me . ' 

This said Enid to hide her true thoughts; for indeed she felt that she
had never before seen as noble a youth as Geraint , or one for whom her
thoughts were so kind . 

 ' Then so shall it be , ' said Earl Inewl . 

On the morrow , ere it was dawn , they arose and arrayed themselves; and
at break of day they were in the meadow . Before the seat of the young
earl , who was Inewl ' s nephew , there was set up a post , and on it was
the figure of a gyr-falcon , of pure gold , and marvellously wrought , 
with wings outspread and talons astretch , as if it were about to strike
its prey . 

Then the knight whom Geraint had followed entered the field with his
lady , and when he had made proclamation , he bade her go and fetch the
falcon from its place ,  ' for , ' said he ,  ' thou art the fairest of women , 
and , if any deny it , by force will I defend the fame of thy beauty and
thy gentleness and nobleness . ' 

 ' Touch not the falcon ! ' cried Geraint ,  ' for here is a maiden who is
fairer , and more noble , and more gentle , and who has a better claim to
it than any . ' 

The stranger knight looked keenly at Geraint , and in a haughty voice
cried : 

 ' I know not who thou art; but if thou art worthy to bear arms against
me , come forward . ' 

Geraint mounted his horse , and when he rode to the end of the meadow
laughter rippled and rang from the people watching him . For he bore an
old and rusty suit of armour that was of an ancient pattern , and the
joints of which gaped here and there . And none knew who he was , for his
shield was bare . 

But when , thundering together , the two knights had each broken several
lances upon the shield of the other , the people eyed Sir Geraint with
some regard . When it seemed that the proud knight was the better
jouster , the earl and his people shouted , and Inewl and Enid had sad
looks . 

 ' Pity it is , ' said Enid ,  ' that our young knight hath but that old
gaping armour . For when they clash together , I feel the cruel point of
the proud knight ' s spear as if it were in my heart . ' 

 ' Fear not , my dear , ' said the old dame , her mother .  ' I feel that him
you have learned to love so soon is worthy a good maiden ' s love , and I
think that his good knighthood will overcome the other ' s pride . ' 

Then the old knight went to Geraint . 

 ' O young chief ! ' he said ,  ' since all other lances break in thy strong
young hand , take you this . It was the lance I had on the day when I
received knighthood . It was made by the wizard smith who lives in the
Hill of Ithel , and it hath never failed me . ' 

Then Sir Geraint took the lance and thanked the old earl , and looked
back to where stood Enid . And his heart leaped to see how proud and
calm she stood , though her lips trembled as she smiled at him . 

With that the strength seemed to course like a mountain stream through
all his body; and from the uttermost end of the meadow he pricked his
horse and rushed towards the proud knight . His blow was so mighty , and
the good lance so strong , that the shield of the proud knight was cleft
in twain , and he was thrust far beyond his horse and fell crashing to
the ground . 

Then Geraint leaped from his horse and drew his sword , and the other
rising to his feet , they dashed together with the fury of wild bulls;
and so battled long and sore until the sweat and blood obscured their
sight . Once , when the proud knight had struck Sir Geraint a mighty
blow , the young knight saw , as he fought , how the maid Enid stood with
clasped hands and a pale face of terror , as if she feared for his life . 

With the sight of the maiden ' s dread and the memory of the insult done
by the proud knight to Queen Gwenevere , Sir Geraint waxed both fiercer
and stronger; and gathering all his might in one blow , he beat with his
sword upon the crown of the knight ' s helm , and so fierce was it that
the headpiece broke and the sword-blade cut to the bone . 

Straightway the knight fell down upon his knees and craved mercy . 

 ' Why should I give mercy to one so full of pride and arrogance ? ' said
Sir Geraint .  ' Thou , through thy servant , hast shamefully insulted the
queen of my lord , King Arthur . ' 

 ' Fair knight , ' cried the other ,  ' I confess it , and I give up my
overbearing henceforth , and I crave for mercy . And if ye give me my
life , I will be your man and do your behest . ' 

 ' I will give thee mercy on one condition , ' said Geraint ,  ' which is that
thou and thy lady and thy dwarf page go instantly and yield yourselves
into the hands of the queen , and claim atonement for your insult . And
whatsoever my lady the queen determines , that shall ye suffer . Tell me
who art thou ? ' 

 ' I am Sir Edern of the Needlands , ' replied the other .  ' And who art
thou , sir knight , ' he asked ,  ' for never have I met so valiant and good
a knight of his hands as thou art . ' 

 ' I am Geraint of Cornwall , ' said the young knight . 

 ' It giveth comfort to me to know that I am overcome by so noble a
knight , ' said the other . Then he got upon his horse , all wounded as he
was , and with his lady and the page beside him took his way sadly to
Arthur ' s court . 

Then the young earl rose and came to Sir Geraint , and asked him to stay
with him at his castle , for he loved all knights of great prowess and
would have them to talk to him . 

 ' Nay , I will not , ' said Sir Geraint coldly;  ' I will go where I was last
night . ' 

 ' Have your will , sir knight , ' replied the young earl courteously .  ' But
I will ask Earl Inewl to permit me to furnish his manor as it should be
furnished for your honour and ease . ' 

Sir Geraint went back to the manor , conversing with Earl Inewl and his
wife , and with the maiden Enid . 

When they reached the house , they found it full of the servants of the
earl , who were sweeping the hall and laying straw therein , with tables
and benches as were suitable , and soon a great fire leaped and crackled
on the stone in the centre . Then when Sir Geraint ' s wound had been
washed and salved and bound , and he had placed upon himself his walking
attire , the chamberlain of the young earl came to him and asked him to
go into the hall to eat . Sir Geraint asked where was Earl Inewl and his
wife and daughter . 

 ' They are in the bower putting on robes which my lord the earl hath
sent , more befitting their station and your honour , ' said the earl ' s
chamberlain . 

Sir Geraint liked it not that the maiden should be dressed in robes
given by the man who had stripped her father of all his wealth , and he
said coldly : 

 ' I would that the damsel do not array herself , except in the vest and
veil she hath worn till now . And those she should wear , ' he said , 
 ' until she come to the court of Arthur , where the queen shall clothe
her in garments fitting for her . ' 

It was so done , and the maiden sat in her poor robes while the other
knights and ladies in the young earl ' s company glittered and shone in
satin and jewels . But she cared not for this , because Sir Geraint had
bidden her . 

When meat was done and mead was served , they all began to talk , and the
young earl invited Sir Geraint to visit him next day . 

 ' It may not be , ' said Sir Geraint;  ' I will go to the court of my lord
Arthur with this maiden , for I will not rest while Earl Inewl and his
dame and daughter go in poverty and rags and trouble . And it is for
this I will see my lord , so that something may be done to give them
maintenance befitting their station . ' 

Then , because the young earl admired Sir Geraint for his knightly
strength , his nobility of manner and his prowess , there was sorrow in
his heart for the old Earl Inewl . 

 ' Ah , Sir Geraint , ' he said ,  ' I am sorry if your heart is sore because
of my kinsman ' s poor condition; and if you will give me your
friendship , I will abide by your counsel and do what you think I should
do of right . ' 

 ' I thank thee , fair sir , ' said Geraint ,  ' and I will ask ye to restore
unto the Earl Inewl all the possessions that were rightly his , and what
he should have received up to this day . ' 

 ' That I will gladly do for your sake , ' said the young earl . 

Thus it was agreed; and such of the men in the hall who held lands
which rightly belonged to Earl Inewl came and knelt before him and did
homage to him . And next morning the lands and homesteads and all other
his possessions were returned to Earl Inewl , to the last seed-pearl . 

Thereafter Sir Geraint prepared to return to the court of King Arthur , 
and the Earl Inewl came to him with the maiden Enid , whose gentle face
went pale and red by turns . Putting her hand in the hand of Sir
Geraint , the old man said : 

 ' Fair sir , your pursuit of that knight , Sir Edern , and your revenge for
his insult , I shall bless until the last day of my life . For you have
done more goodness and justice than I can ever repay you . But if this
my daughter , for whom ye fought yesterday , is pleasing unto you , then
take her for your wife , with the blessing of myself and my countess . ' 

Sir Geraint clasped the hand of the young maiden , and said : 

 ' My lord , I thank thee , and if my lord King Arthur shall give this
maiden unto me for wife , then will I love her and cherish her all the
days of my life , if she in her heart would choose me for her husband . ' 

 ' My lord , ' said the maiden , raising her frank eyes and flushing face to
him ,  ' I have never known a knight to whom I gave so great goodwill as I
find in my heart for thee . And if thy lord Arthur shall give me unto
thee , I will plight thee my love and loving service till I die . ' 

Thereupon they proceeded on their way to the court of King Arthur , and
what had seemed a long journey to Geraint when he had followed Sir
Edern , now seemed too short , for he and the maid Enid passed it in much
pleasant converse . 

Towards evening they arrived at Caerleon-upon-Usk , and Queen Gwenevere
received Sir Geraint with great welcome , calling him  ' her glorious
knight and champion , ' and telling him that Sir Edern had yielded
himself into her hands to do such atonement as seemed fitting , when he
should have recovered from his wounds . 

At the beauty of the maid Enid all the court marvelled; and the queen
hastened to clothe her in robes of satin , rich and rare , with gold upon
her hair and about her throat . And when she was so dressed , all were
glad that one of so sweet a dignity and rare a beauty had come among
them . 

King Arthur gave her to Sir Geraint with many rich gifts , and Enid and
Geraint were married in the abbey church , and the court gave itself up
to feasting and sport , and acclaimed her one of the three most lovely
ladies in all the isle of Britain . 

When a year had passed in great happiness , ambassadors came from King
Erbin of Cornwall , with a request to King Arthur that he should let Sir
Geraint go home to his father . 

 ' For , ' said the messengers ,  ' King Erbin waxes old and feeble , and the
more he ageth the more insolent and daring are the barons and lords on
his marches , trying to wrest parts of his lands to add to their own . 
Therefore , ' said they ,  ' the king begs you to let his son Sir Geraint
return home , so that , knowing the fame of the strength of his arm and
his prowess , the turbulent lords would desist , and if they would not , 
Sir Geraint would hurl them from his boundaries . ' 

King Arthur , though very reluctant to let so great an ornament of his
court depart , let him go , and Geraint and Enid went with a great party
of the best knights of the Round Table , and rode to the Severn Shore , 
and there took ship to the shores of Cornwall . 

When they reached there , all the people came from their villages
welcoming Sir Geraint and his lovely bride , for the fame of his
prowess , and the way in which he had won his wife , had spread over all
the land . And King Erbin welcomed his son and was glad of his coming , 
and the next day all the chief subjects , the lords and barons holding
land or offices , and the chief tenants of common degree , came into the
hall , and , kneeling before Sir Geraint , did honour to him and swore
fealty . 

Then , with a great company of his chief warriors , Sir Geraint visited
all the bounds of his territory . Experienced guides went with him , and
old men learned in the marks of the boundaries , and priests , and they
renewed the mere-marks that were broken down , and replaced those which
had been wrongfully moved . 

Thereafter men lived peacefully in the land , and on all the borders , 
for under the shadow of the strong young chief no border lords dared to
invade the land , and no fierce baron used oppression . 

Then , as had been his wont at the court of Arthur , Sir Geraint went to
all tournaments that were held within easy reach of his kingdom . Thus
he became acquainted with every mighty knight of his hands throughout
the lands of Cornwall , Wales and Logres; and so great in strength and
prowess did he become that men hailed him as one of the Three Great
Heroes of the Isle of Britain; the other two being Sir Lancelot du Lake
and Sir Tristram of Lyones . And though there Were other great and
valiant warriors , as Sir Lamorake , Sir Bors , Sir Gawaine and his
brother , Sir Gareth , and Sir Palomides , yet all these had been overcome
by one or other of the three heroes . For as yet Sir Perceval was in the
forest with his widowed mother , and knew no arms but a stone or a
stick; and Sir Galahad was not yet born . And these two were knights
stainless of pride or any evil desire , and by that force alone did
strike down every arm , however mighty , that relied on knightly prowess
alone . 

When his fame had spread over all the kingdoms south of Trent , so that
no knight that knew him or saw the device of the golden falcon on his
shield would have to do with him , Sir Geraint began to seek ease and
pleasure , for there was no one who would joust with him . He began to
stay at home and never went beyond his wife ' s bower-chamber , but sat
and delighted in playing chess , or hearing the bards of the court sing
songs of glamour and wizardry , or tell him tales of ancient warriors
and lovers , long since dead . 

The whole court marvelled at his slothfulness as time passed and he
changed not . He gave up the friendship of his nobles , and went not
hunting or hawking; and found no pleasure but in the company of his
wife , whom he dearly loved . 

Men began to scoff and jeer at his name over their cups in hall , or as
they rode with hawk on fist to the hunting , or as they tilted in the
lists . And the lawless lords upon the marches of the land began to stir
and to dare , and when none came to punish them , their plunderings and
oppressions grew . 

Soon these things came to the ears of the old King Erbin , and great
heaviness was upon him . And he called the Lady Enid to him one day , and
with stern sorrow in his eyes spoke thus : 

 ' Fair woman , is it thou that hast turned my son ' s spirit into water ? Is
it thy love that hath made his name a byword among those who should
love him because he is not as he once was--a man no one could meet in
arms and overcome ? Is it thou that hath sunk him in slothfulness , so
that the wolfish lords and tyrant barons upon his marchlands begin to
creep out of their castleholds , and tear and maim his people and wrest
from them and him broad lands and fertile fields ? ' 

 ' Nay , lord , nay , ' said Enid , and he knew from the tears in her brave
eyes that she spoke the truth .  ' It is not I , by my confession unto
Heaven ! I know not what hath come to my dear lord . But there is nothing
more hateful to me than his unknightly sloth ! And I know not what I may
do . For it is not harder , lord , to know what men say of my dear
husband , than to have to tell him , and see the shame in the eyes of him
I love . ' 

And Enid went away weeping sorely . 

The next morning , when Enid awoke from sleep , she sat up and looked at
Geraint sleeping . The sun was shining through the windows , and lay upon
her husband . And she gazed upon his marvellous beauty , and the great
muscles of his arms and breast , and tears filled her eyes as she leaned
over him . 

 ' Alas , ' she said half aloud ,  ' am I the cause that this strength , this
noble and manly beauty have all lost the fame they once enjoyed ? Am I
the cause that he hath sunk in sloth , and men scoff at his name and his
strength ? ' 

And the words were heard by Geraint , and he felt the scalding tears
fall upon his breast , and he lay appearing to be asleep , yet he was
awake . A great rage burned in him , so that for some moments he knew not
what to do or say . 

Then he opened his eyes as if he had heard and felt nothing , and in his
eyes was a hard gleam . He rose and swiftly dressed , and called his
squire . 

 ' Go , ' he said to the man ,  ' prepare my destrier , and get old armour and
a shield with no device thereon , old and rusty . And say naught to
none . ' 

 ' And do thou , ' he said to his wife ,  ' rise and apparel thyself , and
cause thy horse to be prepared , and do thou wear the oldest riding-robe
thou hast . And thou wilt come with me . ' 

So Enid arose and clothed herself in her meanest garments . 

Then Geraint went to his father and said ,  ' Sir , I am going upon a quest
into the land of Logres , and I do not know when I may return . Do thou
therefore keep our kingdom till I return . ' 

 ' I will do so , my son , ' said Erbin ,  ' but thou art not strong enough to
go through the land of Logres alone . Wilt thou not have a company with
thee ? ' 

 ' But one person shall go with me , ' said Geraint ,  ' and that is a woman . 
Farewell . ' 

Then he put on the old and rusty suit of armour , and took the shield
with no device , and a sword and a lance , and then mounting his horse he
took his way out of the town . And Enid went before him on her palfrey , 
marvelling what all this might mean . 

Geraint called unto her and said sternly : 

 ' Go thou and ride a long way before me . And whatever ye see or hear
concerning me , say naught , and turn not back . And unless I speak to
thee , speak not thou to me . ' 

All day they rode thus , and deeper and deeper they sank into a desolate
land , where huge rocks jutted from the starved soil , and there was no
sound or sight of living thing , except it was the wolf looking from his
lair beneath a stone , or the breaking of a branch , as the brown bear on
a distant hillslope tore at a tree to get a honeycomb , and blinked down
at them , marvelling , maybe , to see a knight and a lady in his desolate
domain . 

When , late in the afternoon , their long shadows marched before them
down a broad green road which they had struck upon , Enid ' s heart
suddenly lifted to see the white walls and roofs of what looked like a
rich town; for she knew not what was in her lord ' s mind , and feared
lest his strange anger should push him to go on through the night , and
so become a prey to robbers or wild animals . But she marvelled that
there was no sight or sound of people; no carters or travellers going
to or coming from the city , and no smoke rose above the housetops . 

When they came nearer , she saw the wall of the gate was broken down , 
and that along the broad road beyond the wall the grass waved high
across the street , and the little wooden booths and cabins beside the
road were rotting and decayed . Anon they rode into a broad market-place
or forum , where white buildings rose above them , the windows gaping , 
grass growing on the roofs or in the crannies of the walls , and the
doorways choked with bushes . And out of the broad hallway of the
basilica she saw the grey form of a wolf walk and slink away in the
shadows . 

With a sinking heart she knew that this was one of the fair cities
which the Romans had built , and when they had left Britain this town
had been deserted and left desolate , to become a place where the wolf
and the bear made their lairs , where the beaver built his dam in the
stream beneath the wall of the palace , and where robbers and wild men
lay hid , or the small people of the hills came and made their magic and
weaved their spells , with the aid of the spirits haunting the desolate
hearths of the Romans . 

And as Enid checked her horse and waited for Geraint to come up , that
she might ask him whether it was his pleasure to pass the night there , 
she saw , down the wide street before her , the forms of men , creeping
and gathering in the gloom . Then , fearing lest they should fall upon
her husband before he was aware of them , she turned her horse and rode
towards him and said : 

 ' Lord , dost thou see the wild men which gather in the shadows there in
the street before us , as if they would attack thee ? ' 

Geraint lifted up his angry eyes to hers : 

 ' Thou wert bid to keep silent , ' he said ,  ' whatsoever thou hast seen or
heard . Why dost thou warn one whom thou dost despise ? ' 

Even as he spoke , from the broken houses through which they had crept
to assail the single knight , dashed ten robbers , naked of feet , evil of
look , clothed in skins . One leaped at the knight with a knife in his
hand , to be cut down , halfway in his spring , by Sir Geraint ' s fierce
sword-stroke . Then , while Enid stood apart , terror in her heart , prayer
on her lips , she saw him as if he were in the midst of a pack of
tearing wolves , and in the silent street with its twilight was the
sudden clash of steel , the howls and cries of wounded men . 

Then she was aware that six lay quiet on the road , and the remaining
four broke suddenly away towards the shelter of the houses . But two of
these Sir Geraint pursued , and cut down before they could reach cover . 

He rejoined her in silence and sought for a place of lodging; and in a
small villa they found a room with but one door . Here they supped from
the scrip of food and the bottle of wine which Enid had brought , and
there they slept that night . 

On the morrow they pursued their way , and followed the green road out
of the ruined city until they reached the forest . And in the heat and
brightness of the high noon the green and coolness of the forestways
were sweet , and the sound of tiny streams hidden beneath the leaves was
refreshing . 

Then they came upon a plain where was a village surrounded by a bank of
earth , on which was a palisade . And there was a wailing and weeping
coming from between the little mud-cabins therein; and as they
approached they saw in the middle green four knights in armour and a
crowd of poor frightened folk about them . 

As they passed the gate of the village a poor man ran from the group , 
and threw himself before Sir Geraint . 

 ' O sir knight , ' he cried full piteously ,  ' if thou art a good knight and
a brave , do thou see justice done here . For these four lords would cut
my father ' s throat if he say not where his money is hid . ' 

 ' Are they his proper lords ? ' asked Geraint . 

 ' Nay , sir knight , ' said the man .  ' Our land is Geraint ' s , and these
lords say that he sleeps all day , and so they will be our masters . And
they do ever oppress us with fine and tax and torture . ' 

Therewith Sir Geraint rode through the gate of the village and
approached the group . He saw where the four knights stood cruelly
torturing a poor old man whom they had tied to a post , and the sweat
stood upon the peasant ' s white face , and the fear of death was in his
eyes . 

 ' Lords ! lords , ' he cried in a spent voice ,  ' I have no money , for you
did take all I had when you told us our lord Geraint was become a court
fool . ' 

 ' Thou miser ! ' jeered one of the knights ,  ' that was two months agone , 
and thou hast something more by now . Will this loose thy secret , 
carrion ? ' 

At the cruel torture the man shrieked aloud , and by reason of the pain
his head sank and he slid down the post in a swoon . And a young woman
rushed forth , threw her arm about the hanging body , and with flashing
eyes turned and defied the knights . 

Next moment it would have gone ill with her , but the voice of Sir
Geraint rang out . 

 ' Ho , there , sir knights , ' he cried ,  ' or sir wolves--I know not which ye
are--have ye naught to do but to squeeze poor peasants of mean
savings ? ' 

The knights turned in rage , and laughed and sneered when they saw but
one solitary knight in old and rusty armour . 

 ' Ah , sir scarecrow ! ' cried one , leaping on his horse ,  ' I will spit thee
for thy insolence . ' 

 ' Knock him down and truss him up with this starveling peasant , ' cried
another . 

All now had mounted , and the first prepared to run at Sir Geraint , who
backed his horse through the gateway into the open plain . Anon the
first knight came , hurling himself angrily upon him . But deftly Sir
Geraint struck the other ' s lance aside with his sword , and as the rider
rushed past him , he rose in his stirrups , his blade flashed , and then
sank in the neck of the felon knight , who swayed in his saddle and then
crashed to the ground . 

Then the second horseman attacked him furiously , being wroth at the
death of his companion . But Sir Geraint couched his lance , and caught
the other on the edge of his shield , and the spear passed through his
body . 

And by good hap also he slew the other two , one with his lance , the
other with his sword on foot . 

Enid , full of fear while the fight was raging , felt gladness and sorrow
when she saw how nobly her husband had smitten these torturers with
justice , and she said that of a truth she had been wrong , and that
there was no sloth in his heart , no weakness in the strong arm of her
lord . 

Then Sir Geraint took off the armour from each of the four knights and
piled them on their horses , and tied them together , and bade her drive
them before her . 

 ' And do thou go forward some way , ' said he sternly ,  ' and say not one
word to me unless I speak first unto thee . ' 

As he mounted his horse , the man that had been tortured came forward
with his people and knelt before him , and kissed the mail-clad shoe in
his stirrup , and in rude few words they thanked him tearfully , asking
for his name , so that they could speak of him in their prayers . 

 ' I am called Sir Slothful , ' said Sir Geraint ,  ' and I deserve not your
worship . But , hark ye , if other evil lords come upon these marches and
seek to oppress thee , tell them that though Sir Geraint sleeps now , he
will soon awake and they shall not stand before his vengeance . ' 

And so he rode on , leaving the poor folks marvelling but happy . 

Then in a little while they came upon a highroad , and the lady went on
first , and for all his anger , Geraint was sorry to see how much trouble
Enid had in driving the four horses before her , yet how patient she
was . 

Soon they beheld a wide valley below them , the fairest and richest in
homesteads and farms that they had yet seen . A river ran through the
middle of it , and the road on which they passed ran down to a bridge
over the river , beyond which was a castle and a walled town . 

Sir Geraint took the road towards the bridge , and soon a knight came
cantering towards them . 

 ' Fair sir , ' said Sir Geraint ,  ' canst thou tell me who is the owner of
this fair valley and that walled city ? ' 

 ' Of a truth , ' said the other ,  ' these are the lands of King Griffith , 
whom men call the Little King . He holds them of King Erbin , whose son , 
that was so famous , men say has become a worthless court dandy . ' 

 ' I thank thee for thy words , fair sir , ' said Geraint , and would pass
on . 

 ' I would counsel thee not to attempt to cross the bridge , ' said the
knight ,  ' unless thou dost intend to fight the little king . For armed
strangers he will not suffer to pass , and I doubt me if thy arms are of
much use to thee . ' 

And the knight smiled at the rusty arms and shield of Sir Geraint . 

 ' Nevertheless , ' said Sir Geraint ,  ' though my arms are old , I will go
this way . ' 

 ' If thou dost so , ' said the knight ,  ' thou wilt meet with shame and
defeat . For the little king is a man of giant strength . ' 

But Sir Geraint passed down towards the bridge and crossed it , and went
along the road beyond towards the town . Presently Sir Geraint heard the
sound of hoofs behind him , and looking round he saw a knight following
him upon a great black horse , tall and stately and stepping proudly . 
The knight was the smallest that Sir Geraint had ever seen . 

When the stranger had come up to him , he said : 

 ' Tell me , fair sir , is it by presumption or by ignorance that thou
comest armed along this road ? ' 

 ' I knew not that in any of the lands of King Erbin , a peaceful man , 
though he be armed , could not go without hindrance , ' replied Sir
Geraint . 

 ' That was so , ' replied the knight ,  ' when King Erbin ' s son Sir Geraint
was a man of prowess , not a soft fool . Then his name alone kept his
borders clean of robber lords and bandit knights; but now that he is
less than naught , I myself must keep my land clean of thieves in rusty
armour that would frighten and oppress poor folk . ' 

 ' Nevertheless , ' said Sir Geraint ,  ' I will travel by this road , and ye
hinder me at your peril . ' 

 ' Have at thee , then , ' said the little knight , and together they spurred
towards each other . 

Sir Geraint marvelled to feel how powerful were the lance-strokes of
the little man , while , as for himself , so high was the little knight ' s
horse and so small was the rider , that he was hardly able to get a good
blow at him . But they jousted until at the third bout the little king ' s
lance broke short , and then they dismounted , and lashed at each other
with their swords . 

At first Sir Geraint thought it was nigh unseemly that one so strong
and tall as himself should have to do with so small a knight; but if he
thought that he had advantage in his longer reach and greater strength
he quickly saw his error . 

For the little king was a man of marvellous strength and agility , and
for all Sir Geraint ' s knowledge and strength , the other ' s strokes were
so boldly fierce , so quick and powerful , that it was not long ere Sir
Geraint found he had need of great wariness . 

Soon their helmets were cracked and their shields dented and carved and
their hauberks in rags , and hardly could they see between the bars of
their vizors for the sweat and blood in their eyes . 

Then at last Sir Geraint , enraged that one so small should give him so
much trouble to conquer , gathered all his strength in one blow , so that
the little king was beaten to his knees , and the sword flew from his
hand ten yards away . 

 ' I yield me ! ' cried King Griffith ,  ' and never have I fought with so
valiant and strong a knight . Have mercy and spare me , and I will be thy
man . ' 

 ' Be it so ! ' said Sir Geraint ,  ' but thou hast already sworn to be my
man . ' 

And he lifted up his vizor and showed his face , whereat the little king
did off his own helm quickly and came and kneeled humbly before him . 

 ' Sir Geraint , ' he said ,  ' forgive me my words concerning thee , but men
told me that ye had forgotten that you had once been so glorious a man , 
and were softening to a fool . ' 

 ' Nay , ' said Sir Geraint ,  ' they were the fools that said so . And now I
will depart , for I see these marches are in safe keeping in your hands , 
fair king . ' 

But the little king wished Geraint to come to his castle to be rested
and healed of his wounds , and Geraint and Enid went and abode there a
few days . But ever Sir Geraint was cold and stern to his wife , for he
was still angry at her disbelief in him . 

Sir Geraint would not stay longer , though his wounds were but half
healed , and on the third day he commanded Enid to mount her horse and
to go before him with the four other horses . 

While the sun climbed up the sky they rode through the wilderness , by
tangled woods , deep valleys and quaking marshes , until they reached a
deep dark forest . Suddenly as they rode they heard a great wailing of
distress , and bidding Enid stay , Geraint dashed through the trees
towards the crying , and came out upon a great bare upland , and beside
the wood were a knight , dead in his armour , and two horses , one with a
woman ' s saddle upon it . 

And looking further Geraint saw three small dark shaggy trolls making
swift way up the hill towards a great green mound , and in the arms of
one of them was a damsel , who shrieked as she was borne away . 

Fiercely Sir Geraint spurred his horse up the slope , bidding the trolls
to stop , but they only ran with an exceeding great swiftness . But he
pursued them , and when they were within a few steps of a small door in
the hillside , the one dropped the maiden , and the three of them turned
at bay . And the damsel ran shrieking away down the hill . 

The trolls had dark thin faces , with curly black hair and fierce black
eyes , and their rage was horrible to see . They were lightly clothed in
skins , and in their arms they held , one a bar of iron , another a great
club , and the third a long sharp stick . 

Sir Geraint commended his soul to Heaven , for he knew he was to battle
with evil dwarfs who lived in the hollow hills , and whose strength was
greater than any man ' s , and whose powers of wizardry were stronger than
Merlin ' s . 

He dashed with his lance at the one with the iron bar , but the
hill-troll slipped away , and brought the great bar with a heavy blow
upon his lance , so that it snapped in twain . Then one leaped like a
wild cat upon the arm that held the rein , but happily Sir Geraint had
drawn his sword , and with one stroke slew him . Then the two others
leaped towards him , but the blows of the bar and club he caught upon
his shield and slew the troll with the club . 

Ere Sir Geraint could draw his sword back from this blow , he felt his
horse fall under him , for the dwarf with the iron bar had with one blow
broken the beast ' s back . Quickly avoiding the horse , Sir Geraint dashed
at the dwarf , who ran towards the hole in the hill , but ere he could
reach it Sir Geraint gave him a blow on the crown of his head , so
fierce and hard , that the skull was split to the shoulders . 

So then Sir Geraint turned and walked slowly down the hill , for he was
dazed , and his old wounds had broken afresh . But he came to where Enid
stood comforting the damsel mourning over the dead knight , and when he
was there , straightway he fell down lifeless . 

Enid shrieked with the anguish of the thought that he was dead , and
came and knelt beside him and undid his helm and kissed him many times . 
And the sound of her wailing reached an earl named Madoc , who was
passing with a company along the road from a plundering expedition , and
he came and took up Geraint and the dead knight , and laid them in the
hollow of their shields , and with the damsels took them to his castle a
mile along the road . 

Now the earl was a tyrant and a robber , and had done much evil on the
borderlands of Geraint , in burning , plundering and slaying , since he
had heard that Geraint was become soft and foolish . And he had
recognised Sir Geraint while he lay in the swoon , and rejoiced that now
he was like to die . 

As he rode along he thought that if he could prevail upon the Lady Enid
to wed him , he might get much land with her , as the widow of the dead
Sir Geraint , future King of Cornwall . And he determined to make her
marry him . 

When , therefore , he and his host had reached his castle , he ordered the
dead knight to be buried , but Sir Geraint he commanded to be laid in
his shield on a litter-couch in front of the high table in the hall . So
that Sir Geraint should die , he commanded that no leech should be sent
for . 

While his knights and men-at-arms sat down to dine , Earl Madoc came to
Enid and begged her to make good cheer . But , thinking to gain more from
secrecy , he did not tell her that he knew who she was , nor did he show
her that he knew who was her lord . 

 ' Take off thy travelling clothes , fair lady , ' he said ,  ' and weep not
for this dead knight . ' 

 ' I will not , ' she said , and hung over Geraint , chafing his hands and
looking earnestly into his pallid face . 

 ' Ah , lady , ' the earl said ,  ' be not so sorrowful . For he is now dead , 
and therefore ye need no longer mourn . But as ye are beautiful , I would
wed thee , and thou shalt have this earldom and myself and much wealth
and all these men to serve thee . ' 

 ' I tell you I will rather die with my dead lord , if indeed he be dead , ' 
cried Enid ,  ' than live in wealth with you or any one . ' 

 ' Come , then , ' said the earl ,  ' and at least take food with me . ' 

 ' Nay , I will not , ' said Enid ,  ' and never more will I eat or be joyful
in life . ' 

 ' But , by Heaven , thou shalt , ' said Madoc , furious at her resistance to
his will . 

And he drew her from beside the litter , and forced her to come to the
table where his knights sat eating , and commanded her to eat . 

 ' I will not eat , ' she cried , straining from his hold towards where
Geraint lay ,  ' unless my dear lord shall eat also . ' 

 ' But he is dead already , thou mad woman , ' cried the earl .  ' Drink this
goblet of wine , ' he commanded ,  ' and thou wilt change thy mind . ' 

 ' I will not drink again until my dear lord drink also , ' said Enid , and
strove to free herself from the grasp of the earl . 

 ' Now , by Heaven ! ' said Madoc wrathfully ,  ' I have tried gentle means
with thee . Let this teach thee that I am not to be baulked of my will . ' 

With that he gave her a violent blow on the ear , and tried to drag her
away out of the hall . And Enid shrieked and wept and cried for help , 
but none of the knights that sat there dared to oppose their lord . 

But suddenly men started up from their seats in terror to see the
corpse of Geraint rise from the hollow of the shield . Enid ' s cries had
roused him from his swoon , and his hand as he raised himself felt the
hilt of the sword beside him . 

He leaped from the litter , and , drawing his sword , he ran towards the
earl , who by now had almost dragged Enid to the door . Raising the
sword , Geraint struck him with so fierce a blow that he cleft his head
in twain . 

Then , for terror at seeing what they thought was a dead man rise up to
slay them , the knights ran from the hall and left Geraint and Enid
alone . 

Enid threw her arms about Geraint , her face bright with happiness . 

 ' My dear lord , I thank God thou art not dead , as this man said thou
wert . And I pray thy forgiveness for doubting that thou hadst forgotten
thy manhood , for of a truth none is so brave , so good as thou art . ' 

Geraint kissed his wife , smiling wanly the while . 

 ' Sorry I am , my dear wife , ' he said ,  ' that I was swooning when thou
hadst need of me . And as for any doubts thou hadst of me , why , let us
both forget them from this time forth . And now we must away , ere this
lord ' s men recover their fright and pursue us . ' 

Enid led him instantly to the stalls where she had seen the horses had
been led , and Geraint took the spear and the horse of the knight whom
the trolls had slain , and , when he had mounted , he took up Enid from
the ground and placed her before him . 

Thus they rode out of the castle , and away as rapidly as they could . 
And now that they were reconciled , much joyful and loving talk was
between them . 

But night was coming on , and Geraint was weak from his wounds and loss
of blood , and Enid was full of trouble for the pain her husband
suffered . She prayed fervently that soon they might reach a town where
she could obtain help for him . 

Suddenly she heard far away in the distance the tramp of horses , and
Enid could have wept for sorrow . But she kept her face calm , though her
lips trembled , Geraint also heard the beat of the hoofs , and turning in
his saddle he looked up , and saw on the skyline of the narrow road the
glint of spears between them and the sky . 

 ' Dear wife , ' he said , with a faint brave smile ,  ' I hear some one
following us . I will put thee in hiding behind this thicket , and should
they slay me , do thou make thy way homeward to my father Erbin , and bid
him avenge my death . ' 

 ' O my dear Geraint ! ' said Enid , sobbing , for all her bravery , as she
thought that he would surely be slain , and that , after all their
trouble , they were not to be allowed to enjoy the happiness of their
reconciliation .  ' I would liefer die with thee , my dear , dear lord . Let
them kill us both , if it is to be . ' 

 ' Nay , dear wife , ' said Geraint ,  ' I would not have thee slain . Revenge
my death if they slay me . ' 

So , with many lingering kisses , he set her down upon the road , and saw
her hide in the thickets . 

By now the gloom of evening had settled upon them , and the sound of
trampling horses had rapidly approached . And painfully , by reason of
his stiff wounds , Geraint dressed his armour as best he could , and laid
spear in rest , and drew his shield before him , and so waited in the
dark road . 

He heard a single knight riding before the others , and soon saw his
figure issue from the gloom with couched lance . And Sir Geraint made
him ready also , resolved to sell his life dearly at the last . 

But as they began to spur their horses , there came the voice of Enid
from the hedgerow beside them . And she cried out piteously in the dark : 

 ' O chieftain , whoever thou art , what renown wilt thou gain by slaying a
dead man ? ' 

The stranger stopped his horse , and called out : 

 ' O Heaven , is it my lord , Sir Geraint ? ' 

 ' Yes , in truth , ' said Enid ,  ' and who art thou ? ' 

 ' I am the little king ! ' said the other , and rode swiftly towards Sir
Geraint . Then he leaped from his horse and came to the stirrup of his
chief . 

 ' My lord , ' he said ,  ' I learned that thou wert in trouble , and came to
see if I could aid thee . ' 

And Enid ran forward with joy at hearing this , and welcomed the little
king , and told him in what a hard pass was Sir Geraint . 

 ' My lord and my lady , ' said Griffith ,  ' I thank Heaven sincerely for the
favour that I come to you in your need . I learned of thy fight with the
trolls and of thy slaying of Earl Madoc , and that thou wert wounded . 
Therefore I rode on to find thee . ' 

 ' I thank thee heartily , ' said Sir Geraint ,  ' and my dear wife also
thanks thee . For of a truth I am spent , and must needs get me rest and
a leech for my wounds . ' 

 ' Then come at once with me , ' said the little king , and after he had
helped Enid to her place before Geraint , he leaped on his own horse . 

 ' Now thou shalt go to the hall of a son-in-law of my sister which is
near here , ' said King Griffith ,  ' and thou shalt have the best medical
advice in the kingdom . ' 

At the hall of the baron , whose name was Tewder , and a most knightly
and gentle lord , Sir Geraint and the Lady Enid were received with great
welcome and hospitality . Physicians were sent for , and they attended
Geraint day by day until he was quite well again . 

The fame of his adventures began to spread along the borders of his
kingdom , and at length reached his own court . And the robber lords and
brigands of the marches , hearing of his deeds , ceased their evil-doing
and made haste to hide from his wrath . Also his father Erbin and the
host at his court repented of their hard thoughts and sneers concerning
him , and praised the strength of his arm , the gentleness of his
courtesy , and his justice and mercy . 

When Sir Geraint and the Lady Enid returned home , all the people
gathered to welcome them . And thenceforth he reigned prosperously , and
his warlike fame and splendour lasted with renown and honour and love , 
both to him and to the Lady Enid , from that time forth . 




VII

HOW SIR PERCEVAL WAS TAUGHT CHIVALRY , AND ENDED THE EVIL WROUGHT BY SIR
BALIN ' S DOLOROUS STROKE


It befell upon a time when King Arthur was Pendragon , or overlord of
the island of Britain , that Earl Evroc held an earldom of large
dominion in the north under King Uriens . And the earl had seven sons , 
the last being but a child still at play about his mother ' s chair as
she sat with her maidens in the bower . 

Lord Evroc was a valiant and a mighty warrior , ever battling against
the hated pagans , when their bands of blue-eyed fierce fighters landed
on his coasts . And when peace was on the land , he went about on
errantry , jousting in tournaments and fighting champions . 

His six elder sons did likewise , and all were famed for their knightly
prowess . 

But the mother sat at home , sad of mood . For she hated war , and would
rather have had her lord and her six tall sons about her in the home . 
And in her heart she resolved that she would plead with Evroc to let
her have her little son Perceval to be a clerk or a learned bard , so
that he should stay at home with her and run no risk of death . 

The sorrow she was ever dreading smote her at length . For a messenger
came one day , saying that Earl Evroc her lord had been slain at
Bamborough , in a mighty mele between some of the best and most valiant
knights of Logres and Alban , and two tall sons with him . 

As the years passed , and her little son began to run , three black days
came within a little of each other , for on these days messengers came
with the sad news of the death of her other boys . One of them had been
done to death by an evil troll on the lonely wastes by the Roman wall , 
two others were slain by the shores of Humber , repelling a horde of
fair-haired Saxon raiders , and the other was killed at a ford , where he
had kept at bay six bandit knights that would have pursued and slain
his wounded lord . 

Then , in her grief , the widow dame resolved that she would fly with her
little son , and make a home for him in some wilderness , where never
sounds or sights of war or death would come , where knights would be
unknown , and no one would speak to him of arms and battles . And thus
did she do , and she left the hall where she had lived , and removed to
the deserts and wastes of the wilderness , and took with her only her
women , and a few boys and spiritless men , too old or feeble to fight , 
or to think of fighting . 

Thus she reared the only son left to her , teaching him all manner of
nobleness in thought and action and in learning , but never suffering
him to see a weapon , nor to hear a tale of war or knightly prowess . 

He grew up loving all noble things , gentle of speech and bearing , but
quick to anger at evil or mean actions , merciful of weak things , and
full of pity and tenderness . 

Yet was he also very strong of body , fleet of foot , quick of eye and
hand . Daily he went to divert himself in the great dark forest that
climbed the high mountains beside his home , or he roamed the wide
rolling moors . And he practised much with the throwing of stones and
sticks , so that with a stick he could hit a small mark at a great
distance , and with a sharp stone he could cut down a sapling at one
blow . 

One day he saw a flock of his mother ' s goats in the forest , and near
them stood two hinds . The boy wondered greatly to see the two deer
which had no horns , while the goats had two each; and he thought they
had long run wild , and had lost their horns in that way . He thought he
would please his mother if he caught them , so that they should not
escape again . And by his great activity and swiftness he ran the two
deer down till they were spent , and then he took them and shut them up
in the goat-house in the forest . 

Going home , he told his mother and her servants what he had done , and
they went to see , and marvelled that he could catch such fleet
creatures as the wild red deer . 

Once he overheard his mother say that she yearned for fresh venison , 
but that the hunter who was attached to her house was lying wounded by
a wild boar . Always Perceval had wondered what the little dark man did
whom they called the hunter , who was always so secret , so that Perceval
could never see where he went or when he returned from the forest . 

So he went to the hut where Tod the hunter lay sick , and charged him by
the love and worship he bore to the countess , that he should tell him
how he could obtain fresh venison . And the dwarf told him . 

Then Perceval took a few sticks of stout wood , with points hardened by
fire , and went into the forest as Tod had told him , and seeing a deer
he hurled a stick at it and slew it . And then he brought it home . 

The countess was greatly wroth that Tod had taught him how to slay , and
she said that never more should the dwarf serve her . And Tod wept , but
when he was well again the countess would not suffer him to stay , but
said he should leave the hall and never come there again . 

She commanded Perceval never to slay any more living things , and the
lad promised . But hard was it to keep his word , when he was in the
forest and saw the wild things passing through the brakes . 

Once , as he strayed deep in the wood , he came upon a wide glade or
laund , with two green hillocks in the middle thereof . And feeding upon
the grass was a great buck , and it had a silver ring round its neck . 
Perceval wondered at this beast being thus adorned , and went up to it
to stroke it . 

But the buck was fierce , and would have gored him with its horns , but
Perceval seized them , and after a great struggle he threw the animal , 
and held it down , and in his wrath he would have slain it with a sharp
stick . With that a swarm of little angry trolls poured from the hollow
hillocks with great cries , and seizing Perceval would have hurt him . 

But suddenly Tod ran among them , and commanded them to release him . And
in the end Tod , who came himself of the troll folk , made the little
people pass the words of peace and friendship with Perceval , and ever
after that the boy went with the trolls , and sported with them in
wrestling , running and other games; and he learned many things of great
wisdom from them concerning the secrets of the earth and air and the
wind , and the spirits that haunt waste places and standing stones , and
how to put to naught the power of witches and wizards . 

Tod ever bade them treat the young lord with reverence .  ' For this is he
who shall do great deeds , ' he said .  ' He shall be a stainless knight , 
who shall gain from evil the greatest strength , and , if God wills , he
shall beat down the evil powers in this land . ' 

But the lad knew not what he meant , though he was very content to have
the trolls for his friends . 

One day Perceval was in the forest far up the mountain , and he looked
over the blue distance far below across the moor , and saw a man riding
on a wide road which he had never noticed before . And the man rode very
fast , and as he went the sun seemed to flash from him as if he was
clothed in glass . Perceval wondered what he was , and resolved to go
across the moor to the road he had seen . 

When he reached the road he found it was very broad , and banked on
either side , and went straight as the flight of a wild duck right
across the moor , and never swerved by the hills or pools , but went over
everything in its way . And as he stood marvelling what mighty men had
builded it , he heard a strange rattling sound behind him , and , turning , 
he saw three men on horseback , and the sun shone from them as he had
seen it shine from the first horseman . 

The foremost checked his horse beside Perceval , and said : 

 ' Tell me , good soul , sawest thou a knight pass this way either this day
or yesterday ? ' 

 ' I know not what a knight is , ' answered Perceval . 

 ' Such a one as I , ' said the horseman , smiling good-naturedly , for it
was Sir Owen , one of King Arthur ' s knights . 

 ' If ye will tell me what I ask , I will tell you , ' said Perceval . 



 ' I will answer gladly , ' said Sir Owen , smiling , yet wondering at the
fearless and noble air of this youth in so wild a waste . 

 ' What is this ? ' asked Perceval , and pulled the skirt of the hauberk . 

 ' It is a dress made of rings of steel , ' answered Sir Owen ,  ' which I put
on to turn the swords of those I fight . ' 

 ' And what is it to fight ? ' 

 ' What strange youth art thou ? ' asked Sir Owen .  ' To fight is to do
battle with spears or swords , so that you would slay the man that would
slay you . ' 

 ' Ah , as I would have slain the buck that would have gored me , ' said
Perceval , nodding his head . 

Many other questions the youth asked eagerly , as to the arms they bore
and the accoutrements and their uses . And at length he said : 

 ' Sirs , I thank you for your courtesy . Go forward swiftly , for I saw
such a one as ye go by here but two hours ago , and he flashed in the
sun as he rode swiftly . And now I will be as one of you . ' 

Perceval went swiftly back to his mother ' s house and found her among
her women . 

 ' Mother , ' he said ,  ' I have seen a great and wonderful sight on the
great road across the moor . ' 

 ' Ah , my dear son , what was that ? ' she asked . 

 ' They were three honourable knights , ' he said .  ' And , mother , I will be
a knight also . ' 

With a great shriek his mother swooned away , and the women turned him
from the room and said he had slain his mother . 

Much grieved was Perceval that he had hurt his mother , and so , taking
his store of pointed sticks , he went off into the forest , and strayed
there a long time , torn between his love for his mother , and the
strange restlessness which the sight of the three warriors had caused
in him . 

As he wandered , troubled , his quick ear caught the clang of metal , 
though he knew not what it was . And swiftly he ran towards the sound a
long way , until he came into a clearing , and found two knights on
horseback doing mighty battle . One bore a red shield and the other a
green one . 

He looked eagerly at this strange sight , and the blood sang in his
veins . And then he saw that the green knight was of slighter frame than
the other , and was weakening before the strokes of the red knight . 

Full of anger at the sight , Perceval launched one of his hard-wood
javelins at the red knight . With such force did it go , and so true was
the aim , that it pierced the coif of the knight , and entered between
the neck and the head , and the red knight swayed and then clattered to
the ground , dead . 

The green knight came and thanked Perceval for thus saving his life . 

 ' Are knights then so easy to slay ? ' asked the lad .  ' Methought that none
might pierce through the hauberk of a knight , and I sorrow that I have
slain him , not thinking what I did . ' 

 ' He was a full evil knight , ' said the other ,  ' and deserved death richly
for his many villainies and oppressions of weak orphans and friendless
widows . ' 

The knight took the body of the dead knight to be buried in a chapel , 
and told Perceval he could have the horse . But the lad would not have
it , though he longed greatly to possess it , and the green knight took
it with him . 

Then Perceval went home , sad , yet wild with wonder at what he had done . 
He found his mother well again , but very sorrowful . And for fear of
giving her pain , he did not tell her of the knight he had slain . 

She called him to her , and said : 

 ' Dear son of mine , it seems I may not keep thy fate from thee . The
blood of thy warlike generations before thee may not be quenched , 
whatever fond and foolish plans I made to keep thee from knowledge of
battle and weapons . Dear son , dost thou desire to ride forth into the
world ? ' 

 ' Yes , mother , of a truth , ' said Perceval .  ' I shall not be happy more
until I go . ' 

 ' Go forward , then , ' she said weeping ,  ' and God be with thee , my dear
son . And as I have no man who is strong of his hands , thou must go
alone , yet will I give thee gold for thy proper garnishing and lodging . 
But make all the haste ye may to the court of King Arthur at
Caerleon-upon-Usk , for there are the best and the boldest and the most
worshipful of knights . And the king will give thee knighthood . And
wherever thou seest a church , go kneel and repeat thy prayers therein;
and if thou hearest an outcry , go quickly and defend the weak , the poor
and the unprotected . And be ever tender towards women , my son , and
remember that thy mother loves thee and prays for thy stay in health
and life . And come thou to see me within a little while . ' 

And he thanked her , saying he would do naught that should shame her , 
but would remember all the nobleness of her teaching; also , that he
would return to see her within a little while . 

Perceval went to the stable and took a bony , piebald horse , which
seemed the strongest , and he pressed a pallet of straw into the
semblance of a saddle , and with pieces of leather and wood he imitated
the trappings he had seen on the horses of the knights . 

Then , after taking leave of his mother , he rode forth , sad at first for
leaving her in sorrow and tears , but afterwards glad that now he was
going into the world to become a knight . And for armour he had a rough
jerkin , old and moth-eaten , and for arms he had a handful of
sharp-pointed sticks of hard wood . 

He journeyed southwards two days and two nights along the great
straight road , which went through the deep dark forests , over desert
places and over the high mountains . And all that time he ate nothing
but wild berries , for he had not thought to bring food with him . 

While he was yet but a little way from the court of King Arthur , a
stranger knight , tall and big , in black armour , had ridden into the
hall where sat Gwenevere the queen , with a few of the younger knights
and her women . The page of the chamber was serving the queen with wine
in a golden goblet richly wrought , which Lancelot had taken from a
knight whom he had lately slain . 

The stranger knight had alighted before the chair of Gwenevere , and all
had seen that full of rage and pride was his look . And he caught sight
of the goblet in the hand of Gwenevere , and he snatched it from her , 
spilling the wine over her dress and dashing it even into her face . 

 ' Now am I well lighted here , ' he said ,  ' for this is the very goblet
which thy robber knight Sir Lancelot reaved from my brother , Sir
Wilder . And if any of you knights here desire to wrest this goblet from
me , or to avenge the insult I have done your queen , let him come to the
meadow beside the ford , and I will slay him , ay , if it be that traitor
Sir Lancelot himself . ' 

All the young knights hung their heads as he mounted his horse and
insolently rode out of the hall; for it seemed to them that no one
would have done so daring an outrage unless , like Sir Garlon whom Balin
slew , he fought with evil magic , so that the strength and prowess of
the mightiest knight would be put to naught . 

Then Perceval entered the hall , and at sight of him upon his rough
piebald horse , with its uncouth trappings , and the old and mouldy
jerkin upon the youth , the knights and others broke forth in excessive
laughter , as much at the sight as to cover their discomfiture and fear
of the knight who had just gone . 

But Perceval took no note of their laughter , but rode up the hall to
where Sir Kay the seneschal stood , wrathful at the outrage on the queen
which he had not dared to avenge instantly . And Perceval looked about
and saw a knight more richly dressed than the others , and , turning to
Kay , he said : 

 ' Tell me , tall man , is that King Arthur yonder ? ' 

 ' What wouldst thou with Arthur , knave ? ' asked Kay angrily . 

 ' My mother told me to seek King Arthur , ' responded Perceval , ' and he
will give me the honour of knighthood . ' 

 ' By my faith , thou farmer ' s churl , ' said Kay ,  ' thou art richly equipped
indeed with horse and arms to have that honour . ' 

Thereupon the others shouted with laughter , and commenced to throw
sticks at Perceval , or the bones left by the dogs upon the floor . 

Then a dwarf pressed forward between the laughing crowd and saluted
Perceval . And the lad rejoiced to recognise him . It was Tod , who had
been his friend among the trolls of the mountains , and with Tod was his
wife . They had come to the court of Arthur , and had craved harbourage
there , and the king of his kindness had granted it them . But by reason
of the prophecy which the trolls knew of concerning the great renown
which Perceval was to gain , they had been dumb of speech since they had
last seen the young man . 

And now at sight of him their tongues were loosed , and they ran and
kissed his feet , and cried together : 

 ' The welcome of Heaven be unto thee , goodly Perceval , son of Earl
Evroc ! Chief of warriors art thou , and stainless flower of knighthood ! ' 

 ' Truly , ' said Kay wrathfully ,  ' thou art an ill-conditioned pair , to
remain a year mute at King Arthur ' s court , and now before the face of
goodly knights to acclaim this churl with the mouldy coat , chief of
warriors and flower of knighthood ! ' 

In his rage he beat Tod the dwarf such a blow , that the poor troll fell
senseless to the ground; and the troll-wife he kicked , so that she was
dashed among the dogs , who bit her . 

 ' Tall man , ' said Perceval , and men marvelled to see the high look on
his face and the cold scorn in his eyes ,  ' I will have vengeance on thee
for the insult and ill-treatment thou hast done these two poor dwarfs . 
But tell me now which of these knights is Arthur ? ' 

 ' Away with thee , ' shouted Kay , enraged .  ' If thou wouldst see Arthur , go
to the knight with the goblet who waits for thee at the ford , and take
the goblet from him , and slay him . Then when thou comest back clad in
his armour , we will speak further with thee . ' 

 ' I will do so , angry man , ' said Perceval , and amid the shouts of
laughter and the sneers of the crowd he turned his horse ' s head and
rode out of the hall . 

Going to the meadow beside the ford , he saw a knight riding up and
down , proud of his strength and valour . 

 ' Tell me , fellow , ' said the knight , who bore on his shield the device
of a black tower on a red field ,  ' didst thou see any one coming after
me from the court yonder ? ' 

 ' The tall man that was there , ' said Perceval ,  ' bade me to come to thee , 
and I am to overthrow thee and to take from thee the goblet , and as for
thy horse and thy arms I am to have them myself . ' 

 ' Silence , prating fool ! ' shouted the knight ,  ' go back to the court and
tell Arthur to come himself , or to send a champion to fight me , or I
will not wait , and great will be his shame . ' 

 ' By my faith , ' said Perceval ,  ' whether thou art willing or unwilling , 
it is I that will have thy horse and arms and the goblet . ' 

And he prepared to throw his javelin-sticks . 

In a proud rage the knight ran at him with uplifted lance , and struck
him a violent blow with the shaft between the neck and the shoulder . 

 ' Haha ! lad , ' said Perceval , and laughed ,  ' that was as shrewd a blow as
any the trolls gave me when they taught me their staff play; but now I
will play with thee in my own way . ' 

Thereupon he threw one of the pointed sticks at the knight , with such
force and with such sureness of aim that it went in between the bars of
his vizor and pierced the eye , and entered into the brain of the
knight . Whereupon he fell from his horse lifeless . 

And it befell that a little while after Perceval had left the court , 
Sir Owen came in , and was told of the shameful wrong put upon the queen
by the unknown knight , and how Sir Kay had sent a mad boy after the
knight to slay him . 

 ' Now , by my troth , ' said Owen to Kay ,  ' thou wert a fool to send that
foolish lad after the strong knight . For either he will be overthrown , 
and the knight will think he is truly the champion sent on behalf of
the queen , whom the knight so evilly treated , and so an eternal
disgrace will light on Arthur and all of us; or , if he is slain , the
disgrace will be the same , and the mad young man ' s life will be thrown
away . ' 

Thereupon Sir Owen made all haste , and rode swiftly to the meadow , 
armed; but when he reached the place , he found a youth in a mouldy old
jerkin pulling a knight in rich armour up and down the grass . 

 ' By ' r Lady ' s name ! ' cried Sir Owen ,  ' what do you there , tall youth ? ' 

 ' This iron coat , ' said Perceval , stopping as he spoke ,  ' will never come
off him . ' 

Owen alighted marvelling , and went to the knight and found that he was
dead , and saw the manner of his death , and marvelled the more . He
unloosed the knight ' s armour and gave it to Perceval . 

 ' Here , good soul , ' he said ,  ' are horse and armour for thee . And well
hast thou merited them , since thou unarmed hast slain so powerful a
knight as this . ' 

He helped Perceval put on his armour , and when he was fully dressed
Owen marvelled to see how nobly he bore himself . 

 ' Now come you with me , ' he said ,  ' and we will go to King Arthur , and
you shall have the honour of knighthood from the good king himself . ' 

 ' Nay , that will I not , ' said Perceval , and mounted the dead knight ' s
horse .  ' But take thou this goblet to the queen , and tell the king that
wherever I be , I will be his man , to slay all oppressors , to succour
the weak and the wronged , and to aid him in whatever knightly
enterprise he may desire my aid . But I will not enter his court until I
have encountered the tall man there who sent me hither , to revenge upon
him the wrong he did to my friends , Tod the dwarf and his wife . ' 

And with this Perceval said farewell and rode off . Sir Owen went back
to the court , and told Arthur and the queen all these things . Men
marvelled who the strange young man could be , and many sought Tod and
his wife to question them , but nowhere could they be found . 

Greater still was their marvelling when , as the weeks passed , knights
came and yielded themselves to King Arthur , saying that Perceval had
overcome them in knightly combat , and had given them their lives on
condition that they went to King Arthur ' s court and yielded themselves
up to him and his mercy . The king and all his court reproved Kay for
his churlish manner , and for his having driven so splendid a youth from
the court . 

And Perceval rode ever forward . He came one day towards the gloaming to
a lonely wood in the fenlands , where the wind shivered like the breath
of ghosts among the leaves , and there was not a track or trace of man
or beast , and no birds piped . And soon , as the wind shrilled , and the
rain began to beat down like thin grey spears , he saw a vast castle
rise before him , and when he made his way towards the gate , he found
the way so overgrown with weeds that hardly could he push his horse
between them . And on the very threshold the grass grew thick and high , 
as if the door had not been opened for a hundred winters . 

He battered on the door with the butt of his lance; and long he waited , 
while the cold rain drove and the wind snarled . 

After a little while a voice came from above the gateway , and glancing
up he saw a damsel looking through an opening in the battlements . 

 ' Choose thou , chieftain , ' said she ,  ' whether I shall open unto thee
without announcing thee , or whether I shall tell her that rules here
that thou wishest to enter . ' 

 ' Say that I am here , ' said Perceval .  ' And if she will not house me for
the night , then will I go forward . ' 

Soon the maiden came back and opened the door for him , and his horse
she led into the stable , where she fed it; and Perceval she brought
into the hall . When he came into the light and looked at the girl , he
thought he had never seen another of so fair an aspect . 

She had an old garment of satin upon her , which had once been rich , but
was now frayed and tattered; and fairer was her skin than the bloom of
the rose , and her hair and eyebrows were like the sloe for blackness , 
and on her cheeks was the redness of poppies . Her eyes were like deep
pools in a dark wood . And he thought that , though she was very
beautiful , there was great arrogance in her look and cruelty in her
lips . 

When Perceval went towards the dais of the hall he saw a tall and
stately lady in the high seat , old of years and reverend of aspect , 
though sorrowful . Several handmaids sat beside her , sad of face and
tattered of dress . All welcomed him right kindly . Then they sat at
meat , and gave the young man the best cheer that they had . 

When it was time to go to rest , the lady said : 

 ' It were well for you , chieftain , that you sleep not in this castle . ' 

 ' Wherefore , ' said Perceval ,  ' seeing that the storm beats wildly without
and there is room here for many ? ' 

 ' For this reason , ' said the lady ,  ' that I would not that so handsome
and kindly a youth as you seem should suffer the doom which must light
upon this my castle at dawn . ' 

 ' Tell me , ' said Perceval ,  ' what is this castle , and what is the doom
you speak of ? ' 

 ' This castle is named the Castle of Weeds , ' replied the lady ,  ' and the
lands about it for many miles belonged to my husband , the Earl Mador . 
And he was a bold and very valiant man; and he slew Maelond , the eldest
son of Domna , the great witch of Glaive , and ever thereafter things
were not well with him . For she and her eight evil sisters laid a curse
upon him . And that in spite of this , that he slew Maelond in fair
fight , for all that he was a false and powerful wizard . And Domna came
to my husband , when he was worn with a strange sickness , and as he lay
on his deathbed . And she said she should revenge herself upon his
daughter and mine , this maiden here , when she shall be full twice nine
years of age . And she will be of that age ere dawn to-morrow morn , and
at the hour will the fierce Domna and her fearful sisters come , and
with tortures slay all that are herein , and take my dear daughter
Angharad , and use her cruelly . ' 

The maiden who had opened to Perceval was that daughter , and she
laughed harshly as her mother spoke . 

 ' Fear not for me , mother , ' she cried .  ' They will deck me in rich robes , 
and I shall not pine for fair raiment , as I have pined these ten years
with thee . ' 

The lady looked sadly upon her as she heard her words . 

 ' I fear not , my daughter , that they will take thy life , ' she said ,  ' but
I dread this--that they will destroy thy soul ! ' 

And Angharad laughed and said : 

 ' What matter , so it be that I live richly while I live ! ' 

 ' Nay , nay , ' said Perceval , and in his voice was a great scorn ,  ' it is
evil to speak thus , and it belies your beauty , fair maiden . Rather a
life of poverty than one of shamefulness and dishonour . Thus is it with
all good knights and noble dames , and thus was it with our dear Lord . ' 

Then turning to the lady , he said : 

 ' Lady , I think these evil witches will not hurt thee . For the little
help that I may give to thee , I will stay this night with thee . ' 

After he had prayed at the altar in the ruined chapel of the castle , 
they led him to a bed in the hall , where he slept . 

And just before the break of day there came a dreadful outcry , with
groans and shrieks and terrible screams and moanings , as if all the
evil that could be done was being done upon poor wretches out in the
dark . 

Perceval leapt from his couch , and with naught upon him but his vest
and doublet , he went with his sword in hand to the gate , and there he
saw two poor serving-men struggling with a hag dressed all in armour . 
Behind her came eight others . And their eyes , from between the bars of
their helms , shone with a horrible red fire , and from each point of
their armour sparks flashed , and the swords in their grisly hands
gleamed with a blue flame , so fierce and so terrible that it scorched
the eyes to look upon them . 

But Perceval dashed upon the foremost witch , and with his sword beat
her with so great a stroke that she fell to the ground , and the helm on
her head was flattened to the likeness of a dish . 

When she fell , the light of her eyes and her sword went out , and the
armour all seemed to wither away , and she was nothing but an old ugly
woman in rags . And she cried out : 

 ' Thy mercy , good Perceval , son of Evroc , and the mercy of Heaven ! ' 

 ' How knowest thou , hag , ' said he ,  ' that I am Perceval ? ' 

 ' By the destiny spun by the powers of the Underworld , ' she said ,  ' and
the foreknowledge that I should suffer harm from thee . And I knew not
that thou wert here , or I and my sisters would have avoided thee . But
it is fated , ' she went on ,  ' that thou come with us to learn all that
may be learned of the use of arms . For there are none in Britain to
compare with us for the knowledge of warfare . ' 

Then Perceval remembered what he had heard the trolls--the people of
the Underworld--say , though he had not understood their meaning .  ' The
stainless knight , ' they said ,  ' shall gain from evil greater strength , 
and with it he may confound all evil . ' 

 ' If it be thus fated , ' he said ,  ' I will go with thee . But first thou
shalt swear that no evil shall happen to the lady of this castle nor to
her daughter , nor to any that belong to them . ' 

 ' It shall be so , ' said the witch ,  ' if , when the time comes , thou art
strong enough to overcome my power . But if thou failest , Angharad is
mine to do with as I will . ' 

Then Perceval took leave of the lady of the Castle of Weeds , and of
Angharad . And the lady thanked him with tears for saving their lives , 
but the girl was cold and scornful and said no word of thanks . Then
Perceval went with the witches to their Castle of Glaive . 

He stayed with them for a year and a day , learning such knowledge of
arms , and gaining such strength , that it was marvel to see the feats
which he performed . And while he lived with them they strove to bend
him to their wills , for they saw how great a knight he would become in
prowess and in knightly deeds . They tempted him every hour and every
day , telling him what earthly power , what riches and what great
dominions would be his , if he would but swear fealty to the chief
witch , Domna , and fight for her against King Arthur and his proud
knights . 

Perceval prayed daily for strength to withstand the poison of their
tongues , and evermore he held himself humble and gentle , and thought
much of his widowed mother in her lonely home in the northern wastes , 
and of the promise he had made her . Sometimes he thought of Angharad , 
how beautiful she was , and how sad it was that she had so cold a heart , 
and was so cruel in her words . 

Anon the witch Domna came to him , and said that he had now learned all
that she could teach him , and he must go and prove himself against
greater powers than he had ever yet known . If he prevailed not in that
battle , the ladies of the Castle of Weeds would become the prey of the
witches , and greater power of evil would they have in the world than
ever before . Then she gave him a horse and a full suit of black armour . 

So Perceval took the horse , and armed himself and rode forth . And anon
he came to a hermit ' s cell beside a ruined chapel , and he alighted and
went into the chapel , and stripped himself , and laid all his armour , 
his lance , and his sword , before the high altar . 

Prayerfully he gave his arms to the service of God , and devoted them
one by one to do only knightly and pure deeds , to rescue the oppressed
and the weak , to put down the proud , and to cherish the humble . 

And as he ended praying , the armour stirred of itself , and though it
had been black before , now did the darkness fade from it , and it all
became a pure white . While he marvelled , a faint light glowed over
hauberk , helm , shield , sword and lance , and there was an exceeding
sweet savour wafted through the place . And ghostily , as in a silver
mist , he saw above the altar the likeness of a spear , and beside it a
dish or salver . And at the wondrous sight his breath stayed on his
lips . Then slowly the vision faded from his sight . 

He arrayed himself in his armour that was now of a dazzling white , and
he rode forth and thought to go towards Camelot , where was the court of
King Arthur . But he felt that some power drew him aside through the
desolate ways of a hoar forest , where all the trees were ancient and
big , and all bearded with long moss . 

In a little while he saw a vast castle reared upon a rock in the midst
of the forest . He rode up to it , and marvelled that it was all so
quiet . Then he beat upon the door with the butt of his lance , and the
door opened , and he entered into the wide dark hall . On the pallets
under the wall he saw men lying as if dead . And in the high seat at the
head of the hall sat a king , old and white , but richly clothed , and he
seemed dead like all the rest . All were clad in garments of an ancient
kind , as if they had lived and died a thousand years agone , yet had not
rotted into dust . On the floor , about the wide heap of ashes where the
fire had burned , the hounds still lay as if asleep , and on the posts
the hawks sat stiff upon their perches . 

Much did Perceval marvel at this strange sight , but most of all he
marvelled to see where a shaft of light from a narrow window gleamed
across the hall full upon a shield hung on the fire-pillar beside the
high seat in which the king sat like one dead . 

Perceval caused his horse to pick its way through the hall , and he
approached the shield . And he saw that it was of shining white , but
whiter than the whiteness of his own , and in the centre thereof was a
heart . As he sat looking thereat , he marvelled to see that the heart
seemed to stir as if it were alive , and began to throb and move as if
it beat . Then the whiteness of the shield began to dazzle like to a
light that mortal eyes could not bear . 

He lifted his hand and took the shield by its strap from the peg on
which it hung , and as he did so , a great sigh arose from within the
hall , as if at one time many sleepers awoke . And looking round , he saw
how all the men that had seemed dead were now on their knees , with bent
heads and folded hands as if in prayer . 

The king in the high seat stirred and sat upright , and looked at
Perceval with a most sweet smile . 

 ' The blessing of God is upon thee , young White Knight , ' said he ,  ' and
now is my watch and ward all ended , and with these my faithful
companions may I go . ' 

 ' Tell me , sir , ' said Perceval ,  ' what means this ? ' 

 ' I am Marius , ' said the king ,  ' and I was that Roman soldier who took
pity of the gentle Saviour dying in His agony upon the rood . And I
helped to take Him from the cross . For my pity did God , whom till then
I had not known , deal with me in marvellous wise . And this shield was
mine , and a holy hermit in a desert of Syria did bless it , and prophesy
concerning it and me . I came to this land of Britain when it was full
of evil men , warring fiercely together , and all in heathen darkness . I
preached the Word of Christ , I and my fellows that came with me , until
the heathens rose up and would slay me . And by that time I was wearied
and very old , and wished to die . Yet I sorrowed , wondering whether God
would do naught to rescue these people from this slavery to the old
evil law . Then a man of God came to me at night , a man of marvel , and
he caused this castle to be builded in this ancient wood , and he put my
shield upon the post , and bade me and my dear friends sleep .  ' For , ' 
said he ,  ' thou hast earned thy sleep , and others shall carry on thy
work and reveal the mercy of God and his Christ to these poor heathens , 
and they shall turn to God wholly . And no evil shall be able to break
in upon thy repose . But when , in the distant future , men ' s hearts are
turning to evil again , one that is of the three white knights shall
come and take this shield , to ward him in the great battle against
evil , and then thou and all that are with thee shall have the
restfulness of death thou hast merited . Go then , thou good knight , ' 
went on King Marius ,  ' fight the good fight against that thing of evil
whom the good man spoke of , and may my shield encompass thee and ever
guard thee . ' 

Perceval took the shield and left his own . Turning , he rode back
between lines of silent forms bent in prayer . He went forth into the
forest some little way , and heard from the castle the singing of a
joyful hymn . And , looking back , he saw that the castle had vanished . 
But still above him and about him was the sound of singing , of a
sweetness indescribable , as if they sang who had gained all that they
desired . 

Then Perceval rode forward till it was night; but never could he get
sight of castle or knight ' s hold or hermit ' s cell where he could be
houselled for the night . So he abode in the forest that night , and when
he had prayed he slept beside his good horse until it was day . 

Just before the dawn he awoke to the sound of a great rushing wind all
about him . Yet marvel it was to see that the trees in that hoar wood
did not wave their branches , but all were still . 

Then he was aware of a sweet savour which surrounded him , and anon a
gentle voice spoke out of the darkness . 

 ' Fair White Knight , ' said the voice ,  ' it is ordained of thee that thou
goest to the lands of the King Pellam in the north , where an evil power
seeks to turn men from the New Law which Christ brought , and to make
them cleave to the Old Law with its cruelty and evil tortures . And
there at the Castle of the Circlet thou shalt fight a battle for the
Saviour of the world . And whether thou shalt win through all , none know
as yet . But in thy purity , thy humility , is thy strength . Fare thee
well ! ' 

Much moved at these words , Perceval knelt and prayed , and then , as the
dawn filtered through the trees , he mounted his horse and began his
long journey to the north . 

On the seventh day he crossed a plain , and saw far in the north where
the smoke as of fires rose into the clouds , and here and there he saw
the fierce red gleam of flames . And he passed through a ford , and then
he entered a land all black and desolate , with the bodies of the dead
beside the way , unburied , and the houses all broken or burned . In other
places the grass and weeds grew over the hearths of desolated homes , 
and wild beasts made their lairs where homely folk seemed lately to
have lived their simple happy lives . 

No man or child could be seen anywhere to ask what all this might mean . 
But one day , as he walked his horse beside a brook , over the long
grass , he came upon a poor half-starved peasant who had not strength to
run . And the man knelt before him , and bared his breast , and said , 
 ' Strike , sir knight , and end my misery ! ' 

But Perceval raised him in his arms and kissed him , and gave him bread
and wine from his scrip , and when the poor man was revived , Perceval
asked him what his words meant . 

 ' Ah , Sir White Knight ! ' said the man , whose tears fell as he spoke , 
 ' surely thou art an angel of heaven , not of the pit , such as have
ravened and slaughtered throughout this fair land since good King
Pellam was struck by the Dolorous Stroke that Balin made . For of that
stroke came all our misery . The sacred relics of the Crucifixion fled
our land , our king sickened of a malady that naught could heal , our
crops rotted , and our cattle died . Yet did some among us strive to live
and do as brave men should in all adversity . But into the land came an
evil and a pagan knight , the knight of the Dragon , and he willed that
all should scorn and despise the good Christ , and should turn to the
old gods of the standing stones and the oaken groves . And those that
would not he slew , and their folk he trampled underfoot , and their
herds and fields he destroyed and desolated . And I , fair lord , have
lost my dear wife and my wee bairns , and I wonder why I fled and kept
my life , remembering all I have lost . ' 

 ' Take heart , ' said Perceval ,  ' and remember that it is God His mercy
that chastiseth , and that while thou hast life thou hast hope . It is a
man ' s duty , a man ' s nobility , to bear sorrows bravely , and still to
work , to do all and to achieve . I think God will not long let this evil
knight oppress and slay . In His good time He will cut him down . ' 

 ' Fair sir , ' said the peasant ,  ' I thank thee for thy cheer , and I will
take heart and trust in God ' s good time . ' 

And Perceval rode forward through the blackened land and found the
forests burning and the fields wasted . Anon he came to the edge of a
plain , and saw a great castle in the distance . And there came to him a
damsel , weeping , and when he craved of her to tell him why she mourned , 
she stayed , and looked at him as if astounded . Then she cried with a
great cry of joy . 

 ' Oh , tell me , fair sir , who art thou ? Thou hast the white armour which
it was foretold the spotless knight should wear , and on thy shield is
the Heart as of Him that bled to save the world . ' 

 ' I know not what you say , ' replied Perceval ,  ' but my name is Perceval , 
son of Evroc , and I seek the wicked knight that doeth all this evil . ' 

 ' Then thou art the White Knight , ' said the damsel ,  ' and now I pray that
God aid thee , for my lady and all this poor land have need of thee . 
Come thou to my mistress , the lady of the Chaplet . ' 

Therewith she led him to the castle , and the lady thereof came out to
him . She was of a sad countenance , but of a great beauty , though poorly
clothed . 

 ' Fair sir , ' she said ,  ' my maiden hath told me who thou art , and I
sorrow that one so noble as thou seemest shall essay to overcome the
fiend knight of the Dragon . Yet if thou shouldst prevail , all men in
this tortured land will bless thee , and I not the least . For daily doth
the evil knight slay my poor knights , and cometh and casteth their
blackened and burned bodies before my hall . And many of my poor folk
hath he slain or enslaved , and others hath he caused to follow his evil
worship , and many of my rich and fair lands hath he wrested from me . ' 

 ' Therefore , fair lady , ' said Perceval ,  ' I would seek him without delay , 
for to essay the force of my body upon him , by the grace of God . ' 

 ' And shouldst thou conquer , ' said the lady ,  ' with the fiend ' s death the
hallowed relics which King Pellam guarded shall return to bless this
land . Now , therefore , go ye towards the Burnt Land beyond the brook , 
for that is where is the lair of the fiend that doth oppress us . ' 

Perceval went forward across the plain to a brook , and having forded
the water he came to a wide hollow where the ground was all baked and
burned , and the trees were charred and black . Here and there lay pieces
of armour , red and rusted , as if they had been in a fierce fire; and in
one place was the body of a knight freshly slain , and he was charred
and black . 

Then , as Perceval looked about him , he saw the dark hole of a cave in a
bank beside the hollow , and suddenly therefrom issued a burst of
horrible fire and smoke , and with a cry as of a fiend a black knight
suddenly appeared before him on a great horse , whose eyes flashed as
with fire and whose nostrils jetted hot vapours . 

 ' Ha ! thou Christian ! ' cried the knight in a horrible voice ,  ' what dost
thou here ? Wouldst thou have thy pretty white armour charred and
blackened and thyself killed by my dragon ' s power ? ' 

Then Perceval saw how the boss of the Black Knight ' s shield was the
head of a dragon , its forked tongue writhing , its teeth gnashing , and
its eyes so red and fiendish that no mortal , unless by God ' s aid , could
look on it and live . From its mouth came a blinding flash as of
lightning and beat at Perceval , but he held up his shield of the
Throbbing Heart , and with angry shrieks the Black Knight perceived that
the lightning could not touch the shield . 

Then from his side the evil knight tore his sword , and it flamed red as
if it was heated in a fierce furnace , and thrusting forward he came and
beat at Perceval . But the White Knight warded off the blows with his
shield , which the flaming sword had no power to harm . 

Then did the Black Knight marvel greatly , for never had a knight , 
however skilled , withstood him , for either the lightning of the dragon
shield had burnt him , or the stroke of his flaming sword had slain him
swiftly . And by this he knew that this knight was Perceval . 

 ' Thou knowest not who it is thou fightest , ' said the Black Knight , with
a scornful laugh .  ' Thou must put forth more than the skill thou didst
learn of the witches of Glaive if thou wouldst overcome me . For know
ye , that I am a fosterling of Domna the witch , and she taught me more
than ever she taught you . Now prepare ye to die . ' 

Then Perceval knew that this indeed was the fight which Domna had
foretold , and that if he failed in this , ruin and sorrow would be the
lot of many . 

And Perceval began to thrust and strike full valorously and skilfully , 
but naught seemed to avail him . Thus for a long time they went about , 
thrusting and striking . Always the strength of the Black Knight seemed
as unwearied as that of a demon , while Perceval felt his arm weaken , as
much from the great strokes he gave , as from the burning fires that
darted at him from the dragon shield . 

Then Perceval cried in prayer for aid , and asked that if Christ would
have this land saved for His glory , strength should be given him to
slay this fiendish oppressor . 

Forthwith strength seemed to nerve his arm mightily , and lifting his
sword he struck at the shield of the knight , and so vehement was the
blow that he cut down the shield even to the head of the dragon . 
Feeling the wound , the dragon gave forth a great flame , and Perceval
wondered to see that now his own sword burned as if on fire . 

Then , while the Black Knight marvelled at this stroke , Perceval struck
at him more fiercely and beat in the other ' s helm , so that the fiend
knight bent and swayed in his saddle . But recovering , he became so
wroth that , with his fiery sword , he heaved a mighty blow at Perceval , 
and cut through his hauberk even to the shoulder , which was burned to
the bone . 

Ere the other could withdraw himself , Perceval thrust his sword to the
hilt into the loathsome throat of the dragon . Thereupon the dragon gave
so terrible a cry that the earth seemed to shake with the horror of it . 
And in its wrath and pain the dragon ' s head turned upon the Black
Knight its master , and vomited forth fire so fiercely , that it scorched
and burned him utterly , so that he fell from his horse dead . 

Perceval , dizzy and weak from the battle , alighted from his horse , and
went towards the knight , that he might slay the dragon . But suddenly he
swooned and fell and his consciousness went from him . 

When Perceval came to his senses again , he found himself upon a pallet , 
and the rough walls of a room were about him , while above him was the
window , as it seemed , of an abbey or convent . And he was so weak he
could not lift his hand . 

Some one came to him , and he recognised Tod the troll . 

 ' Ah , good Tod , ' said he faintly .  ' Where am I ? ' 

 ' Now God be praised , ' said Tod , and smiled joyfully .  ' For the nuns
feared ye might not win through the poison of your wound which the
dragon knight did give you .  ' Twas I who had followed you , lord , since
that you did leave the hold of the witches , and when you swooned I
brought you here , to the convent of the White Nuns . And now that I know
ye live , I go to your lady mother to tell her the good news , for she is
weary to know tidings of you . ' 

 ' Go , good Tod , ' said Perceval ,  ' and say I will come for her blessing
when I may mount my horse again . ' 

When Tod had left him , there came a nun to him , and he knew her for
Angharad , who had been so proud and scornful when he left her at the
Castle of Weeds . And he asked her how she had fared , and why she was a
nun . 

 ' To repent me of my evil mind , ' she said .  ' For when you left us I did
not in my heart thank ye that you had saved my mother and me from death
and worse . And the witches came to me and tempted me with riches and
power , even as they were tempting you while you were with them . I heard
how you withstood them , and I scorned you and hated you and said you
would yield some day . And then you left the witches , having learned all
their strong powers , yet having withstood them , and I marvelled much . I
heard men say you were one of three stainless knights of the world that
should achieve the Holy Graal , because of your great humility and
purity , and that great honour and glory would be yours , because you put
not your trust in your own strength . Then I repented , and would not
listen to the evil women . But they followed me , whispering and
tempting , and then for terror I sought a holy hermit , and he brought me
here , and now am I at peace , and my proud heart is humble . ' 

 ' By my faith , sister , ' said Perceval ,  ' I am rejoiced to hear thee . For
I thought when I saw thee that thou hadst a proud and a hard heart . But
as thou wert a beauteous and lovely maiden I thought much of thee; and
had it not been foreordained otherwise , I would have loved thee above
all women and wedded thee . ' 

The sister ' s pale face flushed . 

 ' Nay , but thou hadst a greater glory in store for thee , ' she said .  ' For
thou shalt find the Holy Graal and restore it to this kingdom , and with
it weak men shall forsake their leanings to the old law of hate , and
cleave only to Christ and His new law of love . ' 

 ' It is as God may will it , ' said Perceval . 

In a little while he strengthened and rose from his pallet , and fared
forth towards the north where his widowed mother sat in her lonely
hall , waiting for him whose fame was sweet in every man ' s mouth . 

As he passed through the land , he saw how it had already begun to smile
again . Men went to their work unafraid , the corn was brightening on the
hills , the cattle lowed , women sang at their work , and children played . 
And all blessed him as he rode . 

Thus was ended at last the sorrow in the land of King Pellam which was
brought in by the Dolorous Stroke which Sir Balin had given a
generation before . 


