Now the young page Owen , who had saved King Arthur from midnight murder
at the hand of the evil Sir Turquine , whom Lancelot slew , had tarried
at the court of the king , and in prowess and knightly achievements was
among the most famous of the knights of the Round Table . And always was
he wishful to go on strange adventures , however far might be the
country , or dangerous the ways thereto , or cruel and crafty the foes . 

One day King Arthur was at Caerleon-upon-Usk , and sat conversing with a
few of his knights in the presence-chamber . With him was Sir Owen and
Sir Kay , and there was also Sir Conan and Sir Bedevere . The queen sat
near them , while her handmaidens stood by the window at needlework . 

In a little while Arthur said he would sleep until the horn sounded for
dinner . For he had come from London late the night before , and had not
had his full rest . 

 ' But , ' said he ,  ' do you , my knights , continue your talk , and tell each
other tales as before , and if you are hungry , Kay will give you collops
of meat and horns of mead . ' 

So the king slept on his broad seat of green rushes , over which was
spread a splendid covering of flame-coloured satin . And cushions of red
satin were under his head . 

Kay ordered a page to bring meat and bread and mead , and when the four
had eaten , Sir Conan was called upon to tell how he became possessed of
a dark bay palfrey , as to which all envied him for its beauty , but
concerning which he always put off telling the tale of how he had
obtained it . 

 ' You must know , ' began Sir Conan ,  ' that I was the only son of my
parents , and the confines of my father ' s barony in Lothian were too
small for my aspiring and my daring . I thought there was no adventure
in the world too great for my doing , and when I had fought all the
knights who would meet me in my own country , and had slain all the
trolls that wrought evil there , I equipped myself in my best armour and
set forth to seek greater adventures in deserts and wild regions . And I
fared south for many weeks , over desolate mountains and wild and
terrible fastnesses of rock and moor , where only the robber seemed to
live , and the wild , magic people of the green mounds , and where there
was no sound but the song of the lark , the plunge of the beaver and
otter in the river , the growl of the brown bear from the rock , and the
howl of the wolf at night . 

 ' And I fared through all these terrors unscathed , and one day I came to
a high ridge , and saw stretching below me the fairest valley I had ever
seen . The grass was green and smooth , the trees were soft and of an
equal growth; and a river ran gently through the dale , with a path
beside it . 

 ' I followed the path all day until the evening , but met no one , until , 
as the afternoon was waning , I came suddenly upon a large and massive
castle , which shone in the westering sun . And I approached the green
before the gateway , and saw two youths with curling auburn hair , clad
richly in garments of yellow satin , with frontlets of gold upon their
forehead . And they had daggers with jewelled hilts , and these they were
shooting at a mark . 

 ' And on a bench a little way from them was a handsome man in the prime
of life , of a proud look , clad in a rich mantle . 

 ' I went forward and saluted him , and he returned my greeting with great
courtesy . And , rising , he led me into the hall , which , however , was but
poorly furnished . And I wondered that the knight and the youths should
be so richly clothed , while the hall was scanty . 

 ' Six maidens came forward , and while three took my horse , the others
unarmed me , and gave me water wherein to wash , and a dining-robe to put
on . And the six maidens were fairer than any I had ever seen . Then we
sat down when the meat was ready , and though the food was good , it was
simple , and the vessels and flagons upon the table were of silver , but
very old and dented , as if they had been long in use . 

 ' And no word was spoken until the meal was ended , and then the knight
asked me my name and whither I was going . 

 ' I told him my name , and he told me his . And he was , he said , Sir Dewin
of Castle Cower . And I told him that I was faring south seeking any
great adventure , so that I might gain glory and renown .  " For , " I said , 
 " I wish to find a knight who is stronger and more dexterous in arms
than I . " 

 ' At that he looked upon me and smiled . 

 ' " If I did not fear to distress you too much , " he said ,  " I would show
you what you seek ! " 

 ' " Tell me , " I said ,  " for I am eager to obtain this adventure . " 

 ' " Sleep here to-night , " said Sir Dewin ,  " and in the morning rise early , 
and take the road to the wood behind the castle . Follow the path till
you come to a fountain in a glade . There you will see a large cup , with
a chain . Strike the cup with your lance , and you will have the
adventure ye desire . " 

 ' And Sir Dewin smiled again as if he thought the adventure was one
which he deemed was beyond me , and I was angered and soon retired to my
pallet . But I could not sleep , for I was eager to rise and meet this
adventure , and to come back and mock Sir Dewin for his laughter . 

 ' Before dawn I arose and equipped myself , and mounted my horse , and
took my way to the wood , as Sir Dewin had told me . And the road was
long and difficult; but at length I came to the glade and found the
fountain . On a stone pillar beside it a chain was fastened , and at the
end of the chain was a large cup . 

 ' With my lance I struck the cup , and instantly there was a great peal
of thunder , so that I trembled for fear . And instantly there came a
great storm of rain and of hail . The hailstones were so large and so
hard that neither man nor beast could live through that storm , for they
would have slain them , so fiercely did they beat . And the way that I
escaped was this . I placed the beak of my shield over the head and neck
of my horse , while I held the upper part over my own head . Thus did we
withstand the storm , though the flanks of my horse were sore wounded . 

 ' Then the sky cleared , the sun came out , and a flock of birds began to
sing on a tree beside the fountain . And surely no one has heard such
entrancing music before or since . So charmed was I with listening , that
I noticed not at first a low rumbling which seemed to come nearer and
nearer . 

 ' And suddenly I heard a voice approaching me , and I looked round just
as a big knight in sky-blue armour rode swiftly up the valley . 

 ' " O knight , " cried he ,  " what ill have I done to thee , that thou usest
me so evilly ? Knowest thou not that the storm which thou hast sent by
evil magic hath slain my best flocks on the hills , and beaten to death
all my men that were without shelter ? " 

 ' He came at me furiously . I put my lance in rest and spurred towards
him , and we came together with so great an onset that I was carried far
beyond the crupper of my horse . 

 ' Then the knight , taking no further notice of me , passed the shaft of
his lance through the bridle of my horse , and so rode swiftly away . And
it moved me to anger to think he despised me so much as not even to
despoil me of my sword . 

 ' Very depressed of spirit was I as I took my way back to the castle of
Sir Dewin . And as I passed through the wood I came to a glade , in the
midst of which was a green mound . And as I passed it I heard laughter , 
which seemed to come from the earth . And I heard a voice sneering and
mocking me . And I guessed it was the voice of a troll or moundman whom
I could not see , who lived in the hillock , and I wonder I did not go
mad with the shame of his derision . 

 ' And I had not the spirit to go to try to break into the mound , lest he
should work magic and more disaster upon me . So I left that glade , with
the sound of his hoarse laughter ringing in my ears . 

 ' I reached the castle of Sir Dewin , and well entertained was I , and
rested for the remainder of that day . And full of courtesy was Sir
Dewin and his household , for none of them referred to my encounter , and
to the fact that I had come back without a horse . And when I rose next
day , there was a dark bay palfrey , ready saddled , waiting in the
courtyard for me . That horse I still possess , though the sight of him
ever brings back the memory of my defeat . 

 ' Verily it seems strange to me that neither before nor since have I
ever heard of any person besides myself who knew of this adventure , and
that the subject of it should exist within the bounds of the lands of
King Arthur , without any other person lighting upon it . ' 

 ' It would be well , indeed , ' said Sir Owen ,  ' to go to try to discover
that valley and that fountain . ' 

 ' Well , indeed , ' said Sir Kay sourly , for he had ever been jealous of
Sir Owen , even when he had been but a page ,  ' if thy mouth were not more
ready to say more than thou ever carest to do . ' 

 ' Thou art worthy of punishment , Sir Kay , ' said Gwenevere sharply ,  ' in
that thou speakest thus of a man so tried in prowess and brave deeds as
Owen . ' 

 ' Fair lady , ' said Sir Owen , laughing ,  ' we take no heed of Kay ' s raw
words . He ever growls like a surly dog . ' 

At that the king awoke , and asked whether it was not time for meat . And
the horn was sounded , and men came in from the tilting-ground and the
play-field , and washed , and the king and all his household sat down to
dinner . 

On the morrow , before dawn , Sir Owen rose privily , and put on his
armour and took his horse , and rode out of the town , and for many days
rode over mountains , until he saw the sea like a sheet of burnished
lead lying on his left hand . 

Then he turned his horse ' s head away , and rode far through wild and
distant places , into the heart of the land . And at length he arrived at
the valley which Conan had described to him , whereat he rejoiced
greatly . 

He descended to the path beside the river , and journeyed along it till
he came to the castle of Sir Dewin , as Conan had described . And the two
youths were on the green before the gate wrestling together , and the
tall knight of proud mien was standing by . To Owen it seemed that he
was fiercer and prouder-looking than Conan had described . Nevertheless , 
he returned the salute of Sir Owen courteously and led him into the
castle . 

Sir Owen was entertained as well as Conan had been , though the hall
seemed poorer , the food coarser , and the maidens seemed careworn , and
not so fair as his friend had described . After the meal Sir Dewin asked
Sir Owen who he was and whither he wended , and Sir Owen replied : 

 ' I have heard of the Knight of the Fountain , and I would fight him and
overcome him , if I may . ' 

Whereat Sir Dewin looked at him with keen fierce eyes , and observed
narrowly the build of Sir Owen ' s body . 

 ' Knowest thou aught of the prize if thou slayest the Knight of the
Fountain ? ' asked Sir Dewin . 

 ' Naught know I of that , ' answered Sir Owen;  ' but I would seek the
adventure , and whatever it will bring . ' 

At this the knight was silent , and seemed to brood for some moments , 
with dark and frowning brows . Then he laughed and said : 

 ' Take thou the path thou seest through the wood behind the castle . 
Follow that till thou comest to a glade wherein is a great mound . There
ye will see a stone slab . Knock on that three times , and the troll-man
that dwells therein will tell thee thy further way . ' 

Sir Owen marked how evil was the smile with which Sir Dewin said these
words; but Sir Owen thanked him , and then he was shown to his pallet
and all retired to rest . 

When he arose in the morning Sir Owen found his horse already prepared , 
and , having put on his armour , he rode forth along the way which the
knight had indicated to him . And he came at last to the glade wherein
he saw the great mound , with grass growing all over it , as if it were a
little hill . In the side he saw a stone slab as if it were a door , and
he struck upon it with the butt of his lance . 

Three times he struck , and at the third blow he heard a voice , rough
and loud , from somewhere above his head . 

 ' Get thee gone , ' cried the voice ,  ' darken not the door of my house , or
 ' twill be worse for thee . ' 

Sir Owen could not see who was speaking , for no one was visible . 

 ' I would ask thee the way to the fountain , ' he replied .  ' Tell me , and I
will not trouble thee further , thou surly troll . ' 

 ' The fountain ? ' cried the voice .  ' I will save thee thy journey , thou
overbearing knight , as I have saved it for others as proud and as
would-be valiant , whom my master hath sent to me ! ' 

With that Sir Owen received so hard and fierce a blow upon his
headpiece that he was hard put to it to keep his wits and his seat; and
looking round he saw the troll , a fierce dark little man , on the very
top of the mound , wielding a long thick bar of iron , as thick as a
weaver ' s beam . 

Sir Owen thrust at the troll with his lance; but the moundman seized it
below the point of steel , and so strong was he , that though Sir Owen
drew him down from the top of the hillock , he could not loose it from
the little man ' s hold . 

Meanwhile , the troll was beating at Sir Owen with the staff of iron , 
which , for all its weight and size , he wielded as if it was no more
than a stout cudgel . And hard bestead was Sir Owen to shield himself
from the smashing blows which rained upon him . At the seventh blow his
shield was cracked across and his shield arm was numbed . 

Suddenly he dashed his horse forward , and the little man , still holding
the lance , was thrown backward upon the grassy slope of his own mound . 
Swiftly Sir Owen leaped from his horse and drew his sword , and while
the troll was rising he dashed at him and wounded him . 

But next moment the troll was up , his dark narrow face terrible with
rage , for the blood ran down the deer-skin tunic which half covered
him . And then the blows of his iron rod came thicker and faster , while
he moved so swiftly round about the knight that Sir Owen , though he
thrust quickly and fiercely , could not strike him again . 

Sir Owen was becoming dizzy and weak , and felt that not for long now
could he bear up his dented and broken shield against the blows that
must at length smash his arm . 

Suddenly the quick movements of the little troll ceased , and he
staggered . Then he dropped the iron bar and swayed like a drunken man
towards the knight . He fell on his knees before Sir Owen , put his head
upon the ground , and clutched the knight ' s steel-clad foot as if to put
it upon his neck . But he could do no more , and so lay panting and spent
with exhaustion . 

And Sir Owen could not find it in himself to pierce him through with
his sword , for the troll ' s subjection made pity come into his heart . 

 ' Ah , sir troll ! ' said the knight , panting also , and very fain to rest . 
 ' A brave troll thou art , seeing thou hast used no magic , but hath
fought me like a very man . ' 

 ' Chieftain , ' gasped the troll ,  ' my heart is like to break , for thou
hast tried me sore . Never yet hath a knight that sought the fountain
withstood my rod as valiantly as thou hast , and thou hast put my
strength all to naught . ' 

 ' But I know not why thou didst try to slay me , ' said Sir Owen ,  ' seeing
that I did but ask thee to show me my way to the fountain . ' 

 ' I am the slave of him that overcometh me , ' answered the troll ,  ' and I
must do his bidding . Sir Dewin did conquer me by evil wizardry , and he
sent thee to me with the three knocks on my door , whereby I knew he
commanded me to slay thee . ' 

 ' Well , and what wilt thou do now , valiant troll ? ' 

 ' I must hide me from the wrath of Sir Dewin , ' said the troll ,  ' until my
sore wound is healed . Then will I be thy slave , sir knight , and help
thee in whatever adventure thou mayst wish ! ' 

 ' Get thee gone , then , good troll , ' said Sir Owen , with a smile .  ' But
first tell me my way to the fountain . ' 

Whereupon the troll showed him the way and gave him certain directions , 
and then said : 

 ' Chieftain , thou wilt conquer in all thy fighting , and great honour and
reward shall be thine . But beware thee of leaving the side of her that
shall love thee , for more than a night and a day , or long woe shall
find thee . And do thou take this , for it may find thee friends . ' 

And the troll , whose name was Decet , held towards him a blue stone upon
a silver string . The stone burned with the dazzling blue of the
lightning flash , when the light caught it . 

Sir Owen thanked him , put the string about his neck , and stood watching
the troll as he limped , faint and wounded , into the mound that was his
home . 

Then , picking up his lance , Sir Owen mounted his horse , and rode
forward through the wood , thinking of this strange adventure . 

When he reached the fountain where a silver cup hung by a silver chain , 
he filled the cup with water , as the troll had bidden him , and threw it
over a pillar of stone that was set beside the fountain . And instantly
there came a clap of thunder as if the earth would dash asunder , and
after the thunder came the shower , and so fierce and heavy were the
hailstones that they would surely have slain horse and rider , but that
Sir Owen , as the troll had bidden him , had put his horse ' s forefeet in
the fountain , and kept his own hand therein , whereby the hailstones
became thin rain before they touched him . 

Then the sky became bright , and the flock of birds descended on the
tree and began to sing . But Sir Owen heeded them not , but mounted his
horse , dressed his shield and lance , and prepared for the combat . 

There came a mourning cry through the wood , and a sky-blue knight on a
high-stepping destrier dashed through the trees towards Sir Owen , and
came against him , lance in rest . Whereupon Sir Owen put spurs to his
horse , and furiously rode against the knight . At the first onset each
broke his lance; whereat they drew their swords and lashed at each
other most fiercely . 

Sir Owen feinted , and then , quickly recovering , he smote the other so
hard and stern a blow that the blade bit through headpiece , skin and
bone , until it wounded the brain itself . 

Then , with a great cry , the blue knight wheeled his horse and fled , 
with Sir Owen in pursuit . But the other knight ' s horse was fleeter , and
Sir Owen could not overtake him , though he kept within a few yards . 

In a little while a great castle , resplendent with new stone , shone
before them . The wounded knight thundered across the drawbridge , with
Owen close behind him; but when the blue knight gained the street
beyond , the portcullis was let fall with a rush . Sir Owen fell from his
horse , and looking round he found that the horse had been cut in twain
by the gate . 

So that Sir Owen found himself , with the forepart of the dead horse , in
a prison between the two gates , while the hinder part of the horse was
outside . And Sir Owen saw that his death must be very near , for already
he saw one of the soldiers who were guarding the gate run after the
knight to the castle , as if for orders to slay him . 

Looking through the inner gate , he saw a narrow street facing him , with
booths and little houses on each side; and coming towards him he beheld
a maiden , small but beautiful , with black curling hair and a circlet of
gold upon her forehead; and she was of high rank , for she wore a dress
of yellow satin , and on her feet were shoes of speckled leather . 

She stopped when but a few steps from the gate where the soldiers stood
watching Sir Owen; and he saw that her eyes were bent fixedly upon the
blue stone which lay on the knight ' s breast . And he saw that , in the
darkness of his prison , it shone with a fierce blue flame . 

He looked up and saw the maiden ' s eyes bent on his , and he seemed to
hear the voice of the maiden speaking to him , as clearly as if she
stood beside him . In these words she spoke : 

 ' Take that stone which is on thy breast , and hold it tightly in the
palm of one hand . And as thou concealest it , so will it conceal thee . 
Thus wilt thou be able to pass unseen between the bars of the portcullis . 
And I will wait for thee on the horseblock yonder , and thou wilt be
able to see me , though I cannot see thee . Therefore , come and place thy
hand on my shoulder , and I shall know that thou art come . And then thou
must accompany me to the place where I shall hide thee . ' 

He saw the maiden turn away and go up the street , and Sir Owen did as
the voice had bidden him . And looking down he saw nothing of himself , 
although he could see the soldiers looking in , and he saw the surprise
and then the horror on their faces , as they realised that they had seen
him spirited away before their eyes . 

Sir Owen passed between them and rejoined the maiden , as she had bidden
him . He went with her , still invisible , and she led him to a small
house , and in it was a large and beautiful chamber , all painted with
gorgeous colours , and well furnished . And there she gave him food , and
he rested securely until late in the afternoon . 

Then , as he looked out of the window upon the wall of the castle , which
towered dark and high above him , he heard a clamour and sounds of a
mourning coming from it . He asked the maiden the cause of it . 

 ' They are administering extreme unction to the Lord Cadoc , who owns the
castle , for he hath been wounded . ' 

 ' And who art thou , that thou shouldst save me who am a stranger ? ' he
asked of the maiden . 

 ' My name is Elined , ' said the maiden ,  ' and since thou bearest the Blue
Stone of the Little Folk , I must aid thee all I can . ' 

At that time she would tell him no more , but shortly left him to his
rest , saying she would come to attend upon him again at the dawning . 

In the silence and darkness of the night Sir Owen awoke by reason of a
woful outcry and lamenting; and then he knew that Earl Cadoc , the
Knight of the Fountain , was dead from the wound he had given him . 

Soon after dawn he arose and clothed himself; and looking out of the
window he saw the streets filled with a great host of people in black , 
and the weeping and the mourning were pitiful to hear . Knights , with
their armour craped , rode in great companies before; then came the
men-at-arms with weapons reversed; then the ladies of the household , 
and after these the priests came , and in their midst was the bier . 

And over it was a veil of white linen , and wax tapers burning beside
and around it , and of the gentlemen who supported the bier on their
shoulders none was lower in rank than a powerful baron , owning broad
lands and great companies of retainers . 

Last of all there came a lady walking behind the bier . And though her
face was stained with the many tears she had shed , and was pale with
sorrow , Sir Owen thought he had never seen so beautiful a lady , or one
so gentle and kind of mien . 

Deeply he sorrowed because he had caused the death of her lord , 
inasmuch as it had given her such grief . 

Her hair , yellow and long and curled , hung dishevelled about her
shoulders , and her dress of rich yellow satin was torn , and across it
was a wide sash of black velvet . And it was a marvel that she could see
how to walk , for the tears filled her eyes . 

Sir Owen could not take his gaze from her , and love and pity for her
filled his mind . 

When the procession had passed out of the town the maiden Elined came
into the room , and Sir Owen asked her eagerly who was the lady he had
seen . 

 ' Heaven is my witness , ' replied Elined ,  ' but she is the fairest and the
sweetest and the most noble of women . She is my beloved mistress , and
her name is Carol , and she is Countess of the Fountain , the widow of
him thou didst slay yesterday . ' 

 ' I sorrow for that , ' said Owen ,  ' for I have seen her grief . But , 
verily , she is the woman that I love best . And if my hand hath wounded
her grievously , my arm would more willingly protect her . ' 

 ' Indeed , thou art brave and bold , sir knight , ' said the maiden ,  ' and
much may you win , if you are as faithful in your service and devotion
to her as you have been in the service of your king , the great Arthur . ' 

And when it had passed midday , Elined said to Sir Owen : 

 ' You must keep this chamber while I go and woo for thee . Stir not out
into the city lest ill befall thee . ' 

Elined went to the castle and found all was in confusion , with mourning
and lamentation . Her mistress she found sitting listlessly looking from
the window with pale sorrow on her face; and to Elined ' s greeting she
would respond not . 

 ' It astounds me , ' said Elined at length ,  ' to find you giving yourself
up to unavailing sorrow in this way . ' 

 ' It astounds me also , ' said the countess reproachfully ,  ' that in my
time of trouble and affliction , you , whom I have enriched and favoured
beyond all my handmaidens , should desert me . If I did not love thee , I
should order thee to be executed . ' 

 ' It was for thy advantage that I was absent , ' said Elined .  ' I
reproached not thy grief when thy lord lay dying , but now you have
yourself to think of . Yet you seem more willing to live with the dead
than to take heed what may happen to yourself in a few hours . I would
have thee remember that a live dog is better than a dead lion . ' 

 ' Hence from my sight , unfeeling girl ! ' cried the countess in anger . 
 ' There is no one in the world to compare with my dead lord in beauty , 
in strength , and in prowess . Get thee gone ! ' 

Without a word Elined turned and went from the room . But she had not
gone far before she heard the countess coughing behind her , and on
looking back her mistress beckoned to her . 

 ' You are indeed hardhearted , Elined , ' said she ,  ' to think to leave me
in my grief , and in my need of good counsel . I will overlook thy
cruelty if , as you say , you have been absent for my advantage . What
mean you by that ? ' 

 ' This is my meaning , ' said Elined .  ' Thou knowest that without a man of
knightly prowess and bravery , thou canst not hope to guard the fountain
and keep these wide dominions in the power of thyself . Thou art the
prey and booty of any bold bandit lord that chooses to make war upon
thee , and to capture and wed thee . And dost thou forget the wiles and
treachery of thy old lover whom thou hast flouted , Sir Dewin of Castle
Cower ? Hath he not sworn to take thee and thy kingdom , sooner or later , 
by fair means or by foul ? Therefore it behoves thee at once to find a
noble and generous knight , courtly and worshipful , who will guard thee
and love thee , and hold down the turbulent lords , thy vassals and thy
neighbours . ' 

 ' Hard will such a task be , ' sighed the countess ,  ' for the Earl Cadoc
was a man among men . ' 

 ' Yet I will wager to find thee such another , even excelling him in
knightly prowess , in beauty of person , and for love and devotion to
thee more than his equal , ' replied Elined , who remembered that the dead
earl had not been over tender to his gentle countess on many occasions . 

 ' And where couldst thou find this paragon ? ' said the countess , flushing
a little at the reminder of her late lord ' s neglect . 

 ' At the court of King Arthur , ' replied Elined;  ' for there are to be
found the peerless knights of the world , men of their knightly words , 
and devoted to love and war . 

 ' If it be that I must think of wedding again so soon , ' sighed the
countess ,  ' go then to King Arthur , and find me such a knight . But let
him be gentle as well as brave , with fine and courtly manners--a man , 
indeed , whom I can really love . ' 

Elined went and kissed the flushing cheek of her mistress . 

 ' Trust me for that , ' she said gently .  ' I would do that as much for
myself as for thee , my dear Carol . For did it not often go to my heart
to see thee pine for gentle speech and affection , and sorrow at the
harsh words thou didst suffer ? I will set forth at once to Caerleon , 
and him that I bring shall be worthy of thee . And all others that may
come and woo thee , do thou keep at arm ' s length until I return . ' 

Elined departed from the castle , but she did not go beyond the town . It
was in her mind to lie hidden for as long a time as it would take her
to go to Caerleon and return therefrom . Meanwhile , going about
disguised , she would be able to see what the many lords were doing who
would essay to woo the countess , seeing that , lovely and rich as she
was , she would be a splendid prize . 

And things happened as she had foreseen . Every day there came into the
town one cavalcade or more , with some baron or earl in flashing armour
at the head of his vassals , come to try his fortune and to win the
lovely Countess of the Fountain , and to possess her wide dominions . 

Daily the countess was compelled to receive fresh comers in audience , 
and while with deft excuses she kept each at arm ' s length , they crowded
her audience-chamber , proud and insolent , humble or crafty , eyeing each
other with high looks , each prepared to slay his rival if the need
arose . 

At last there came an earl who , as he came up the street at the head of
a large company of knights , seemed to shine like the sun . For his
armour was all of gold , and jewels were about his neck , and on his
girdle and his wrists . Every toss of his destrier ' s head dazzled the
eyes with the fountain of flashing lights given off by the jewels which
adorned the cloth of gold about its head . 

This knight called himself the Earl of Drood , but Elined was in the
crowd of gaping townspeople that saw him enter , and she knew him for
the old insolent lover of her mistress , whom the countess had ever
despised , Sir Dewin of Castle Cower . 

Sir Dewin disguised himself so that the countess did not know him . She
received him in audience , and though she was startled by the
magnificence of his dress , and a little moved by the gentleness of his
manner , she felt that she feared and distrusted him . 

The next day he craved to see her again , and then said : 

 ' Fair and noble lady , so deeply doth thy beauty move me , that I am
eager to put to the test swiftly the question whether I or some other
happier knight among these noble gentlemen shall obtain thy hand . 
Therefore I crave permission of thee to proclaim a joust between all
these knights that sue for thee , and the winner among them all shall be
he that thou shalt wed . ' 

 ' Sir , ' said the countess with great dignity ,  ' it is not for thee to
order here , but for me . I wish nothing to be done for the space of nine
days , and then will I make my choice . ' 

At which Sir Dewin , though full of rage , must needs seem content . And
the countess hoped that , in the space she had named , Elined would have
returned with the knight of her choice , and she herself could choose
him for her lord , if she thought he was the man whom she could most
trust and love . 

But Sir Dewin wrought upon many of the suitors who were of his mind , 
and they resolved that , will she , nill she , the countess must needs
abide by a contest between all her wooers to be holden on the tenth
day . 

And on the tenth day all the knights , barons , and earls met together in
full armour in a broad green jousting-place beneath the windows of the
countess , and having made the rules of contest , and committed them to
the seneschal of the countess , they prepared to prove which among them
all was the knight of most prowess . 

Then there was fierce hurtling to and fro of knight against knight , and
lances splintered , horses reared , knights fell wounded or dead , and
were dragged away . And for long , among the ninety-nine knights that
there jousted , none of the crowds who looked on could see which were
they who were gaining the day . 

From her window the countess watched with a sorrowing and dreading
heart; for Elined had not yet returned , and therefore the countess must
be the prize of one of these suitors who had pestered her , and none of
whom she cared for . 

Then , when the dust of the jousting had a little cleared , and the
knights had withdrawn to the sides of the lists , to breathe and rest
awhile , it was seen that twelve remained of the ninety-nine . 

The countess , looking from her window , knew them all from the devices
on their shields , and none of them were men she favoured . Some she knew
were evil men , yet , as knights , were powerful in jousting . And she
dreaded which of them should be the victor , to be her lord and master . 

Then the knights hurtled together again , and as one after the other was
unhorsed by stronger opponents and went from the field , she went pale
with fear and anxiety . 

At last there were but two , and these were Sir Dewin , whom she knew as
the Earl of Drood , and the other was a knight in blue armour , with a
shield on which was painted a hillock or mound . And she knew him to be
a man named Sir Daunt , or the Knight of the Mount , a man of fierce
temper , quarrelsome and cruel . 

The countess could have swooned with terror , for she knew that now she
was doomed to an unhappy life , whichever of these knights prevailed . 
For though the Earl of Drood was soft and gentle in speech and manner , 
she feared that this but covered a wicked heart . 

She could hardly bear to look as she heard these two , the last of all
the ninety-nine , crash together in the midst of the jousting-ground . 
And she heard the cries of the onlookers . 

 ' The blue knight ' s the better man ! How he heaves with his sword ! Ah , 
the golden knight is down ! ' 

And looking from her window the countess saw the earl was lying
wounded , and the Knight of the Mount stood over him . Then the earl
surrendered and was carried off the field . 

The great shouts that saluted the victor made the countess turn faint
and sick with dread , so that she fell back among her handmaidens in a
swoon . But , quickly recovering , she stood up , resolved to meet her fate
with proud dignity . 

In a few moments the door opened and the arras was pushed aside , and
the groom of the chambers announced with a shout : 

 ' The Knight of the Mound , victorious in the joust , craves leave to
greet our lady the countess . ' 

The lady bowed assent , trembling in every limb . Then the groom stepped
aside , and into the chamber came a comely gentleman , clad in purple
tunic , rich with chains and jewelled belt . 

But it was not the knight whom the countess had expected , but a
stranger , with a courtly and gentle manner and a winning smile . 

Then from behind him came Elined , full of smiles , with a look of
triumph in her eyes . 

 ' My lady , ' she said , bowing low ,  ' this is the knight , Sir Owen of
Wales , from the court of King Arthur , whom I have brought to protect
you and wed you . He hath just proved himself the doughtiest among a
hundred . ' 

The terror of the countess was changed instantly into joy , and she put
forth her hand , and Sir Owen bent and kissed it , and she led him to the
window seat , and commanded Elined to sit with them . And they spoke full
joyously together , for the countess was much taken with the noble and
gentle bearing of Sir Owen , and admired him because he had proved
himself the best man of all her wooers . 

In a few days she sent for the bishops and priests , and her nuptials
with Sir Owen were celebrated with such feasting that all the country
was full of merriment and joy . And the men of the earldom came and did
homage to Owen , and he became the Earl of the Fountain . 

In a little while thereafter Sir Owen told his lady that it was he who
had chased the soul from the body of her former lord . But the countess
was not vexed by the knowledge , for Sir Owen loved her greatly , and
with all tenderness and honour , and never had the countess been so
happy with Earl Cadoc as she was with Owen . 

Thereafter Earl Owen defended the fountain with lance and sword against
all who ventured to challenge him in his earldom . And the knights who
were thus conquered he held to ransom , and the money he thus obtained
he divided equally among his barons and knights . Never had they had so
generous a lord , nor one of such prowess and knightly worth . And all
his subjects loved Earl Owen passing well . 

Thus for three years in all happiness and quiet did Owen and the
countess dwell . Sir Dewin of Castle Cower had not power to hurt them , 
nor did any other evil light upon them . 

But at the end of this space , towards the close of a summer ' s day , Sir
Owen , by the magic whereby it was made known to him , knew that there
was a knight who challenged him at the fountain . So , putting on his
sky-blue armour , he went forth and found the knight . 

They rushed together , and the strange knight was overthrown . But others
who were with him took him away , and Sir Owen waited . But none other
challenge was made , and in the twilight he retired , resolved to attend
next day in case any others desired to challenge him . 

In the morning the same knight came forth from the company of knights
which was among the trees about the fountain . And so fiercely did Sir
Owen assail him that the head of his lance broke the helmet of the
stranger and pierced the flesh to the bone . Again his companions
carried him off . 

Then other knights came forth and had to do with Sir Owen , but all were
overthrown . At length came one having over himself and his horse a rich
satin robe of honour , and Sir Owen knew that he must be a man of great
dignity , big of body and of knightly prowess . 

They fought together that evening and half through the next day , but
neither could obtain the mastery . And about noon they took still
stronger lances and fought most stubbornly . At length they came so
furiously together that the girths of their horses were broken and both
were borne to the ground . 

They rose up speedily and drew their swords and resumed the combat; and
all those that witnessed it felt that they had never seen such a battle
of heroes before . And suddenly with a blow fiercely strong and swiftly
keen , Sir Owen cut the fastenings of the strange knight ' s helm , so that
the headpiece came off . 

With a cry Sir Owen dropped his weapon , for he knew that this was Sir
Gawaine , his cousin . 

 ' My Lord Gawaine , ' he said ,  ' the robe of honour that covered thee
prevented my knowing it was thee with whom I fought . Take my sword and
my arms , for I yield me to thee . ' 

 ' Nay , Sir Owen , ' said Gawaine ,  ' take thou mine , for I am at thy mercy . ' 

Then came forward King Arthur , and Sir Owen knew him and kneeled before
him and kissed his hand , and then embraced him . And there was much joy
between all the knights and Owen , for all had feared that he had been
slain , and the king in despair had come upon this adventure to learn
tidings of him . 

Then they all proceeded to the castle of the countess , and a great
banquet was prepared , with joustings and hawking parties and games . 
They stayed three months in great happiness and diversion . 

At last , when King Arthur prepared to depart , he went to the countess
and besought her to permit Owen to go with him for the space of three
months , that he might renew his friendships at the court at Caerleon . 
And though it made the countess sorrowful to lose the man she loved
best in all the world , she consented , and Owen promised to return even
before the time appointed . 

So King Arthur returned to Caerleon with Sir Owen , and there was much
feasting and diversion to welcome him . And his kindred and friends
tried to make Owen forget the countess and his earldom , but they could
not . For she was the lady he loved best in the world , and he would
liefer be with her , to guard and cherish her , than in any other place
on the surface of the earth . 

One night , as the court sat after dinner over the mead cups , a juggler
came into the hall and performed many tricks , and there was much
laughter and gaiety at his merry quips and jests . And he craved that he
might search the hands of each lord and lady present , so that he could
tell them if they would be happy in love . 

He began with Sir Kay , and so along the board , uttering merry thoughts
on all , but speaking with serious and solemn looks , until he came to
Sir Owen . And he looked long and earnestly at the marks in that
knight ' s palm , and then said , in a croaking voice : 

  ' A night and a day , a night and a day ! 
 Thou ' lt grieve for thy love for ever and aye . ' 

None knew what this might mean , and they marvelled to see how pale went
the face of Sir Owen . 

For he had suddenly remembered the words of Decet the troll-man , who
had said ,  ' Beware thee of leaving the side of her that shall love thee
for more than a night and a day , or long woe shall find thee . ' 

Instantly Sir Owen rose from the board and went out . Going to his own
abode he made preparations , and at dawn he arose and mounted his horse , 
and set forth swiftly to go to the dominions of the countess . Great was
his fear that some evil had befallen her in consequence of his leaving
her unprotected from the evil powers of Sir Dewin . 

He rode hard and fast northwards through the wild and desolate
mountains , until he saw the sea like burnished lead lying on his left
hand . 

Then he turned his horse ' s head away and rode far into the deep heart
of the land . But though he knew the way passing well , he could not find
the road now , and wandered up and down the lonely moorlands and the
dark forest rides , baffled and wearied , heartsick and full of dread . 

Thus he wandered , for ever seeking the way , and trying this one and
that , until all his apparel was worn out , and his body was wasted away
and his hair was grown long . And at length , from misery and
hopelessness , he grew so weak that he thought that he must die . 

Then he descended slowly from the mountains , and thought to find a
hermit , to whom he might tell all his misery before he died . But he
could not find any harbourage , and so he crawled to a brook in a park , 
and sat there wondering why this evil fate had been visited upon him , 
and grieving that now his beloved countess must be in wretchedness and
sorrow by reason of his forgetting , and that never more could he hope
to see her and tell her how grieved he had been to cause her such pain . 

Then in a little while he swooned under the heat of the sun , from
hunger and weakness , and lay half in and half out of the brook . 

It befell that a widowed lady , to whom the brook and the land belonged , 
came walking in the fields with her maids . And one of them saw the
figure of Sir Owen and , half fearful , she went up to him and found him
faintly breathing . 

The widow lady had him taken into the farmstead of one of her tenants , 
and there he was tended carefully until he came again to his senses . 
And with the good care , meat , drink , and medicaments , he soon began to
thrive again . 

He asked the man of the house who it was that had brought him there . 

 ' It was our Lady of the Moors , ' said the man sadly .  ' And though she is
herself in sore straits and narrowly bestead by a cruel and oppressive
earl , who would rob her of these last few acres , yet she hath ever a
tender heart for those in greater distress than herself . ' 

 ' It grieves me , ' said Sir Owen ,  ' that the lady is oppressed by that
felon earl . He should be hindered , and that sternly . ' 

 ' Ay , ' said the man ,  ' he would cease his wrongful dealing if she would
wed him , but she cannot abide the evil face of him . ' 

Ever and anon the Lady of the Moors sent one of her maidens to learn
how the stranger was progressing , and the maiden came one day when Sir
Owen was quite recovered , and she was greatly astounded to see how
comely a man he was , and how straight and tall and knightly was his
mien . 

As they sat talking , there came the jingle and clatter of arms , and , 
looking forth , Sir Owen saw a large company of knights and men-at-arms
pass down the road . And he inquired of the maiden who these were . 

 ' That is the Earl Arfog and his company , ' she said sadly .  ' And he
goeth , as is his wont , to visit my mistress , and to insult her , and to
treat her unmannerly , and to threaten that he will drive her from the
one remaining roof-tree she possesses . And so will he and his knights
sit eating and drinking till night , and great will be my lady ' s sorrow
that she hath no one to protect her . ' 

They talked of other things for a while , and then said Sir Owen : 

 ' Hath thy mistress a suit of armour , and a destrier in her possession ? ' 

 ' She hath indeed , the best in the world , ' said the maiden ,  ' for they
belonged to her late husband , the Lord of the Moors . ' 

 ' Wilt thou go and get them for me for a loan ? ' he asked . 

 ' I will , ' said the maiden , and wondered what he would do with them . 

Before the day was passed there came a beautiful black steed , upon
which was a beechen saddle , and a suit of armour , both for man and
horse . And Owen armed himself , and when it was dark he went forth and
stationed himself under a great oak , where none could see him . 

When the earl , elated with insolence and wine , came back that way , 
shouting and rolling in his saddle , Owen marked him as he rode . He
dashed out at him , and so fiercely swift was he , and so heavy were his
blows , that he had beaten to the earth those who were beside the earl , 
and the earl he had dragged from the saddle and laid him across his
crupper , before the earl ' s companions were aware of what was done . 

As the countess sat in hall , sadly thinking how soon the craven earl
would thrust her out of her home , there came the beat of hoofs , the
great door of the manor swung open , and a tall knight in black armour
strode in , thrusting another knight before him . 

 ' I am the stranger whom ye rescued from death , my lady , ' said Sir Owen , 
bowing ,  ' and this is thy rascally enemy , the Earl Arfog . Look you , 
churl in armour , ' said Owen , shaking the other till every piece of
steel upon him rattled ,  ' if you do not instantly crave pardon humbly of
this lady , and restore unto her everything you have robbed of her , I
swear to you , by the name of the great Arthur , I will shear your head
from your shoulders . ' 

In great terror the earl , who , since he oppressed women , was an abject
coward , sank upon his knees and promised to restore all he had ever
taken from the lady , as a ransom for his life; and for his freedom he
would give her many rich farms and manors , and hostages as surety . 

Two more days Sir Owen stayed at the manor to see that these things
were duly performed , and then he took his departure . 

 ' I would that you could stay with us , ' said the lady , who was sweet and
gentle , with kindly eyes and a soft voice . 

 ' Lady , I may not , ' said Sir Owen .  ' I seek my dear wife and her
dominions , and have been seeking them these many months . But I fear me
some evil necromancy hath been reared against me , so that I may not
find her again , and she must be in much sorrow and misery in my
absence . And if I never see my lady in life again , yet must I seek for
her until I die . ' 

 ' What is the name of your lady and of her dominions ? ' asked the lady . 

 ' She is the Lady Carol , Countess of the Fountain , ' answered Owen .  ' Do
you know aught of her , and in which direction her lands lie ? ' 

The lady caused inquiries to be made , and her foresters said that the
lady ' s lands of the fountain lay fifteen leagues beyond the mountains , 
and that his way lay through the Wisht Wood , the Dead Valley , and the
Hill of the Tower of Stone , and only a knight of great valour could
hope to win through these places , which were the haunt of warlocks , 
wizards , and trolls , and full of magic , both black and white . 

Joyously Sir Owen mounted his horse , glad to learn that now he might
hope to find his countess again , and the Lady of the Moors wished him
Godspeed , and looked after him long and earnestly till he disappeared
into a forest . 

He journeyed three days through the Wisht Wood , and many were the
dreadful things he saw and heard there , and great eyes , green and black
and yellow , peered at him from the bushes as he sat over his fire at
night . But he clasped the blue stone which the troll Decet had given
him , and naught could hurt him . 

On the fourth day he descended into the Dead Valley . And here he was
like to die , for the air was so thick , and filled with the poison of
witches who haunted there at night , that if he had not ridden fiercely
and fast through its deathly vapours , he could not have reached the
slopes of the Hill of the Tower of Stone , where the air was pure and
blew out of the clean sky . 

Long and toilsome and exceedingly steep was the way up the side of the
mountain , and many times Sir Owen thought he would have to sink down
for sheer weariness . And it was dark night before he reached level
ground , and he could not see where he was or what place he was in . 

But having said his prayers , fed his horse , and eaten from the scrip
which the Lady of the Moors had made up for him , he lay down beside a
thick bush and slept soundly . 

Many were the terrible sounds that came from far below , where fierce
witches and warlocks battled and tore each other in the Dead Valley;
but Sir Owen was so overcome that he awoke not . And just as the morning
broke , a great serpent issued from a rock near where he lay and crept
towards him to slay him . 

Sir Owen still lay asleep , and the huge creature reared his head to
strike . But at that moment a great brown bear , that had sat near Sir
Owen through the night , leaped forward with a fierce growl , and gripped
the serpent by the head . And the serpent hissed and writhed . 

With the noise of the struggle Sir Owen awoke , and marvelled to see the
two animals closed in deadly combat . He drew his sword and slew the
serpent , and having wiped his weapon , he went to his horse and led it
forward . 

But the bear followed him and played about him , as if it was a
greyhound that he had reared . And Sir Owen stopped and said : 

 ' This is a marvel , sir bear , that you would follow me gambolling , 
because I slew the serpent . Are ye so grateful , then , or is it that ye
have been captive unto men , and are fain to see one in this desolate
waste ? ' 

The bear gambolled as if pleased to hear him speak , and went on a
little way and looked back as if to see that the knight was following . 
And when Sir Owen would go another way , the bear stamped his foot , so
that at length , with a laugh , Sir Owen said he would follow the way he
wished . 

Wild was that place and rocky , full of great boulders and with deep
pits obscured by bushes . Full irksome was it to pass through , for
besides the slipperiness of the way , the sun shone pitilessly down , and
its heat was returned by the hard rocks . And there was no water . 

If the bear had not led him , Sir Owen would have missed his footing
many times , and been hurled down one of the many chasms that yawned
everywhere . 

At length Sir Owen became faint with hunger , and he dismounted and
tethered his horse to a leafless thorn . Then he went and lay in the
shadow of an enormous rock that reared up like a huge tower . And the
bear looked at him for a little while and then disappeared . 

Sir Owen wondered sadly whether he should ever win through the perils
that encompassed him , and see again the lady whom he loved best in all
the world . And weak with famine , he doubted whether he should not leave
his bones to bleach beside the great rock . 

Then he looked , and saw the bear coming towards him , and it carried a
roebuck , freshly slain , which it brought and laid at Sir Owen ' s feet . 
The knight sprang up with a glad cry , and struck fire with his flint , 
and the bear brought dried sticks , and soon a fire was blazing , and
juicy collops were spluttering on skewers before the fire . 

When Sir Owen had finished eating , the bear seemed to wish him to
follow him , and the bear led him to a brook in a little green patch , 
and there the knight quenched his thirst . 

By now it was twilight again , and Sir Owen made up the fire and
prepared himself to slumber; and the bear lay down beside him and
blinked at the fire like a great dog . 

The knight saw the sun far in the west dip beneath a cloud , and a cold
wind blew across the waste . And then he heard a sigh from somewhere
behind him , and then another and again a third . And the sound seemed to
come from within the towering stone . 

He cried out ,  ' If thou art a mortal , speak to me ! But if thou art some
evil thing of this waste , avaunt thee ! ' 

A voice , soft and sad , replied ,  ' A mortal I am indeed , but soon shall I
be dead , and as cold as the stone in which I am imprisoned , unless one
man help me . ' 

The stone was so thick that the voices of both were muffled , so that
neither recognised the other . 

Sir Owen asked who it was who spoke to him . 

 ' I am Elined , handmaiden to the Lady of the Fountain , ' was the reply . 

 ' Alas ! alas ! ' cried Sir Owen .  ' Then if thou art in so sore a pass , thou
who wouldst guard my lady till thy death , surely my dear lady is in a
worse pass ? I am Owen , who won her in the jousts , and by evil fortune
left her for more than a night and a day , and never have I been able to
find my way back to my beloved lady . Tell me , damsel , what evil hath
befallen her , and how I may avenge it instantly ? ' 

 ' Glad I am , Sir Owen , ' cried the maiden joyfully ,  ' to hear thou art
still in life , and that thou wert not faithless , as the evil Sir Dewin
said thou wert .  ' Twas his evil magic that changed the landscape as thou
didst ride , and so hid the way from thee . Naught evil hath my lady
suffered yet , nor never will now if thou canst save me this night . But
he hath changed my brother , Decet of the Mound , into some monstrous
shape , and me he hath chained within this stone . Yet for seventy-seven
days my magic kept him from doing further ill to my lady and me; and
that space ends this midnight . Therefore am I glad that the good fate
hath led thee here . Now go thee and hide , until Sir Dewin and his two
evil sons come . And when they would make a fire whereon to burn me , do
thou cut them down and burn them , for so shall all their evil power be
stayed . ' 

Much as Sir Owen wished to ask how his countess had fared through the
time of his absence , he stole away , after he had stamped out his fire . 

Towards midnight there came a great roaring wind , and a shower of
hailstones , and thunder and lightning , and he saw three great black
shapes descend from the sky . And he knew that these were the evil
wizard knights , Sir Dewin and his two sons . They alighted upon the hill
near the Tower of Stone , and took the shapes of men . 

Instantly they began to gather wood and to make a huge heap . And Sir
Dewin made witchfire , and began to light the pile . 

Then Sir Owen crept up in the dark , and the bear went with him . And as
the wizard bent to light the fire , Sir Owen raised his sword and
chopped off the wizard ' s head , so that it hopped into the fire . 

The bear had gone behind the two sons and now clawed them together , and
though they struggled fiercely to get loose , the bear hugged them so
tightly that they could not move . And Sir Owen slew them both with his
sword . 

Then together they heaped the three evil warlocks on the fire and saw
them burn . And when the last of them was consumed in the fierce heat of
the fire , Sir Owen felt a hand seize his , and , turning , he marvelled to
see Decet the Moundman smiling into his face . 

 ' Good luck hath been thy guide , sir knight , ' said the troll ,  ' and thou
hath released me from the evil dumb shape into which this wizard did
change me . But all the happiness that hath been thine and shall be
thine again , thou owest to thy constancy and thy devotion to the lady
thou lovest best . ' 

 ' Glad am I , good troll , to see thee again , ' said Sir Owen ,  ' and glad
shall I be to see my dear lady again . Now let us release her faithful
handmaiden , thy sister . ' 

With the master words which move the living rock , the troll caused the
stone to open , and Elined stepped forth , exceeding glad to see Sir Owen
and her brother again , and to feel the free air upon her cheeks . 

When it was morning they went on their way with great gladness . And
when they reached the City of the Fountain , the countess could not
speak for joy , and all her sadness fled , and in an hour her happiness
was greater than her misery had been for all the months of her sorrow . 

The bells throughout the city were set ringing , and there was public
rejoicing through the length and breadth of the land , for all were glad
exceedingly that their dear lady was happy , and that their lord was
come to his own again . 

Never again did Sir Owen leave his lady while she lived . Elined was
advanced to the place of Chief Lady of the Household , while Decet was
made Head Huntsman , because he loved the forest , and knew the ways of
every bird and beast that lived therein . 


