When Sir Lancelot and all his men had left the realm of Britain and had
betaken themselves to Brittany , where Sir Lancelot had a kingdom of his
own , the Saxons began to increase in Britain , both in strength and
numbers . Almost daily a long black ship , crammed with pagans , was
sighted from some part of the coast; and the British , praying that the
fierce pirates would not visit their homes , would watch the terrible
warship till it passed; or else , caught unawares , would have to flee
inland in a breathless panic when the dragon-headed prow loomed through
the sea-mist , and the barbarous warriors swarmed over the sides and ran
knee-deep in the water , their eyes gleaming with the joy of killing and
their hands eager for the looting . 

Then King Arthur made ready a great host , and for two years he fought
in the northern parts against the bands of the pirates . Swift were the
blows he struck , for the great wide Roman roads were still open , not
grass-grown and deserted , and with his mounted knights and men he could
ride quickly from place to place , striking fiercely and scattering the
foul pagans . 

Ten was the number of these battles which he fought in the north , six
against the Saxon pirates and four against the wild cats of Caledonia , 
whom men call Picts and Scots , and who had ventured south in greater
numbers as soon as they heard how the king warred with his lords and
the rich land was open to plunder . Two others he fought in the south , 
one against an insolent band of pirates who dared even to attack his
palace-city of Caerleon-upon-Usk . But so heavy and deadly a blow did he
strike at them then , that from that battle barely a dozen pagans were
left to flee like fire to their ships . 

Not without loss of many of his brave warriors did Arthur win these
battles , for the pagans were good men of their hands and not easily
were they beaten . Saddest of all was the loss of the noble Geraint , 
who , thrusting back the pirates once again from the harbour of
Llongporth , got his death there with many of his valiant men . 

When the fame of King Arthur ' s prowess and the might of his knights had
gone abroad among the pagans , they were afraid and would not venture in
great numbers to invade the land again , and there was peace and rest in
Britain for a space . 

Then Sir Gawaine , remembering his hatred of Sir Lancelot , persuaded the
king to make him ready another host , with which to invade the land of
Brittany where Sir Lancelot ruled his kingdom . For a long time the king
would not listen to his advice , and the queen , with all her power , 
strove against Sir Gawaine . But that knight and his large following of
knights and men-at-arms had been of great service in the recent wars
against the pagans , and the king could not wholly refuse to listen to
Sir Gawaine ' s demands . 

Also Sir Mordred added his words to those of his brother , and said that
men who came from Brittany said that Sir Lancelot was getting him ready
a large army , and training many men , although he was at peace with his
neighbours in Gaul . But the rumour went , as Sir Mordred reported , that
Sir Lancelot was only waiting his time , and when King Arthur should be
more than usually pressed by his pagan foes , Sir Lancelot and his great
host would sail swiftly across the sea and seize the kingdom of
Britain , when Arthur , exhausted by war , would be unable to withstand
the fresh warriors of Sir Lancelot , and would lose both his queen and
his crown . 

For a time the king would not suffer these evil rumours to be mentioned
in his presence , but many of his counsellors thought there was much
truth in them . At length , so persistent was Sir Mordred and those whom
he craftily persuaded to believe him , that for sheer weariness the king
consented to take an army across to Brittany , and to demand that Sir
Lancelot should own that the king was his overlord , and that he should
do homage to King Arthur for his kingdom . 

The host was prepared , therefore , and at a meeting of his council King
Arthur made his nephew , Sir Mordred , Regent of Britain , to rule in the
king ' s place while he should be abroad; and Queen Gwenevere he placed
under the governance of Sir Mordred , as well as the officers of the
court . 

When they had passed the sea and landed in the coasts of Sir Lancelot ' s
country , Sir Gawaine ordered his knights to go through the nearer
parts , burning the houses of the people and wasting their lands . This
he did in order to enrage Sir Lancelot against the king , so that he
would not listen quietly to any demand which the king might make of
him . 

Word was brought to Sir Lancelot of the landing of King Arthur and the
plundering and wasting of the land , but for some days he would do
naught; for he was loath to take up arms against the king he loved , who
had made him a knight . 

At length Sir Bors came to him , and with that knight were others , as
Sir Lunel of the Brake , Sir Magus of Pol , and Sir Alan of the Stones
with his six mighty brothers . 

 ' My lord , Sir Lancelot , ' said Sir Bors ,  ' it is great shame that we
suffer them to ride over our lands , burning the homes of our folk and
destroying the crops in the fields . ' 

Sir Alan also , who with his brothers were seven as noble knights as a
man might seek in seven lands ere he might find a brotherhood as
valiant and withal as courteous , spoke to the like purport , saying : 

 ' Sir Lancelot , for the love of our land , let us ride out and meet these
invaders in the field , for we have never been wont to cower in castles
nor in towns . ' 

Then spoke Sir Lancelot , who was lord of them all . 

 ' My fair lords , ' he said ,  ' ye wit well that I am loath to raise my hand
against my own dear lord and to shed the blood of Christian men . Yet I
understand how it chafes you to stand by and see your fair land ruined
by those that hate me . Therefore I will send a messenger to my lord
Arthur , desiring him to make treaty with me . Then when we have his
reply , we will consider the matter further . ' 

A damsel was therefore sent to the camp of King Arthur , and she bore a
message from Sir Lancelot . She was brought to Sir Lucan , who was the
king ' s butler , and she told him whence she had come and why . 

 ' Alas ! ' said Sir Lucan ,  ' I fear ye have made your journey in vain , fair
damsel . My lord , King Arthur , would quickly accord with Sir Lancelot , 
whom he loves , but Sir Gawaine will not suffer him . ' 

Just then Sir Gawaine happened to pass by , and saw the maiden , and knew
that she was not one of their party . He turned towards her , and his
fierce eyes looked at her , grimly sour . 

 ' Whence come ye ? ' he said harshly . 

 ' I come hither to speak with King Arthur , ' said the maiden ,  ' for I
bear a message from my lord , Sir Lancelot . ' 

With an angry gesture Sir Gawaine seized her bridle and led her palfrey
swiftly to the edge of the camp . 

 ' Depart ! ' he cried harshly ,  ' and tell your master that it is idle for
him to send to mine uncle . Tell him from me , Sir Gawaine , that by the
vow of my knighthood , I will never leave this land till I or he be
slain . Now go ! ' 

When this message was told to Sir Lancelot , the tears stood in his eyes
and he went apart , and for that day the knights his comrades held their
counsel . But they resolved that next day they would prevail upon Sir
Lancelot to issue forth and give battle . 

But in the morning , when they looked from the walls of the castle , they
saw that Sir Gawaine had crept up in the dawn , and now was the place
besieged . Thereupon there was fierce fighting , for Sir Gawaine caused
ladders to be reared , and his knights strove to climb over the Wall , 
but were mightily beaten back by Sir Lancelot ' s party . 

Then the attackers drew off for a space , and Sir Gawaine , well armed , 
came before the chief gate , upon a stout steed . He shook his lance at
the men over the gate , and cried : 

 ' Where art thou , false traitor , Sir Lancelot ? Why dost thou hide
thyself within holes and walls like a coward ? Look out now , thou timid
soul , for when I may get at thee I will revenge upon thy evil body the
death of my brothers twain . ' 

These shameful words were heard by Sir Lancelot , and all his knights
and kin that stood about him , and they said : 

 ' Sir Lancelot , now ye must be done with thy courtesy and go forth and
beat back those evil words upon his foul mouth . ' 

 ' It is even so , ' said Sir Lancelot;  ' but sorry I am and heavy of spirit
thus to fight with him , who hath been my dear brother-in-arms so long , 
and whose brothers I did unwittingly slay . And much evil shall come of
this . ' 

Then he commanded his strongest horse to be saddled , and bade his
armour to be dressed upon him , and when he was fully armed he stood at
the top of the gate and cried upon the king . 

 ' My lord Arthur , ' he said ,  ' you that made me knight , wit you well that
I am right heavy that ever ye do pursue me thus; but now that Sir
Gawaine hath used villainous words about me , I must needs defend
myself . ' 

Sir Gawaine , seated upon his horse below , laughed grimly , and cried
upon the other . 

 ' O Lancelot , Lancelot , ' he said ,  ' what a man of words thou art ! If thou
darest to battle with me , cease thy babbling , man , and come off , and
let us ease our hearts with strong blows . ' 

Then Sir Lancelot issued forth with many of his knights , and a covenant
was made between the hosts that there should be no fighting until Sir
Gawaine and Sir Lancelot had fought together , and one was either dead
or yielden . 

Thereupon the two knights departed some way and then came together with
all the might of their horses , and each smote the other in the midst of
the shield . So strong were the knights and stout and big the spears , 
that their horses could not stand the shock , and so fell to the ground . 
Then the knights quickly avoided their horses and dressed their
shields , and fought fiercely together with their swords . So valiantly
did each give and receive blows , and so heavy and grim was their
fighting , that all the knights and lords that stood thereabout
marvelled thereat and were fain to say , in as many good words , that
never had they seen such sword-play . 

In a little while , so shrewd and skilful were they , both were wounded
and the blood oozed from the joints of their armour , and it was great
marvel to see that they could still stand , dashing their shields upon
each other , and each beating upon the other with great slashes of their
swords . 

And which was the stronger of the twain none might say . 

Now Sir Gawaine had a magic power , which had been endowed upon him at
his birth by a great witch who was a friend of his mother , the
sorceress , Queen Morgan le Fay , wife of King Lot . No one knew of this
secret power except King Arthur , and often had it availed Sir Gawaine , 
so that in dire perils of onfall , sudden ambush , or long battle , it had
given him the victory , when all about him had been slain or wounded or
taken captive . 

The magic was that , from the hour of nine until high noon , the strength
of his body increased until it was three times his natural strength , 
which itself was full great , though in that , for deep wind and breath
and might of arm , Sir Lancelot was the stronger . 

Now while they fought together , Sir Lancelot felt that Sir Gawaine
seemed not to weaken as time went on , and he marvelled greatly . Then he
felt that indeed Sir Gawaine ' s strength was greater than it had been at
the beginning , and a fear came into his heart that Sir Gawaine was
possessed of a demon . 

But Sir Lancelot was stout of heart as well as old in warcraft , and
knew that if he could tire Sir Gawaine he might , by one blow , get the
better of him when he saw a good chance . Therefore Sir Lancelot began
to husband his strength , and instead of spending it in feinting and
attacking , he bore his shield ever before him , covering himself from
the fierce blows of his enemy . 

Thus he kept up his own strength; but hard put to it was he when , 
towards midday , Sir Gawaine seemed to have the might of a very giant , 
and the shield arm of Sir Lancelot was numbed by reason of the crashing
blows which Sir Gawaine ' s sword rained upon it . 

Great travail indeed had Sir Lancelot to stand up and not to yield; and
while men marvelled how he could endure , none knew all he suffered . 

Then , as the bell of the convent in the town boomed forth the hour of
noon , Sir Gawaine heaved up his sword for a final blow; but his sword
descended just as the last stroke of twelve had died away , and Sir
Lancelot marvelled to feel that what should have been so grievous a
blow that , belike , he could not have stood before it , fell upon his
shield with no more than the strength of the blow given by an ordinary
man . 

When Sir Lancelot felt the might of Sir Gawaine so suddenly give way , 
he drew himself up to his full height and said : 

 ' Sir Gawaine , I know not by what evil power ye have fought , but now I
feel that ye have done . Now , my lord , Sir Gawaine , I must do my part , 
for none may know the great and grievous strokes I have endured this
day with great pain . ' 

With that Sir Lancelot redoubled his blows , and the sword of Sir
Gawaine gave before the might of Sir Lancelot , and his shield was rent . 
Then Sir Lancelot gave so great a buffet on the helm of the other that
Sir Gawaine staggered , and with yet another blow Sir Lancelot hurled
him headlong to the ground . 

Men held their breath , for now , after so fierce and stubborn a
struggle , they felt sure that Sir Lancelot , hot and enraged against his
enemy , would rip off the other ' s helm and strike his head off
instantly . 

But , instead , Sir Lancelot stood for a moment looking at his prostrate
enemy . Then men gasped to see him thrust his sword into its scabbard
with a clang , turn on his heel and begin to walk away . 

They saw the prone knight raise his head and look as if in surprise at
the retreating figure of Sir Lancelot . 

 ' Why dost thou depart ? ' cried Sir Gawaine , rage in his mocking voice . 
 ' Turn again , false knight , and slay me ! If ye leave me thus , thou shalt
gain nothing from it , for when I am whole I will slay thee when I may . ' 

Men marvelled to hear a fallen foe use such shameful and hateful words , 
but they marvelled much more when Sir Lancelot , turning , cried : 

 ' I shall endure you , sir , if God give me grace; but wit you well . Sir
Gawaine , I will never smite you to death . ' 

Many that before had hated Sir Lancelot were moved by these noble
words , and by the sight of his mercy; and they deemed that there was
hardly another man in all Christendom that would have shown such
nobility , save Sir Galahad and Sir Perceval , and they were dead . 

So Sir Lancelot went into the city , and Sir Gawaine was borne into King
Arthur ' s tent and his wounds were cleaned and salved . Thus he lay for
three weeks , hard of mood and bitter in his hatred , and longing eagerly
to get well , so he might try again to slay Sir Lancelot . Meanwhile he
prayed the king to attack Sir Lancelot ' s walls , to try to draw him
forth , or to take the city by treachery . 

But the king would do naught . He was sick for sorrow because of the war
that was between him and Sir Lancelot , and by reason of the wounds of
his nephew Sir Gawaine . 

 ' Alas , ' was ever his reply ,  ' neither you nor I , my nephew , will win
worship at these walls . For we make war for no reason , with as noble a
knight as ever drew breath , and one more merciful and courteous than
any that ever graced the court of any Christian king . ' 

 ' Nevertheless , ' replied Sir Gawaine , raging at the king ' s love for Sir
Lancelot ,  ' neither his mercy nor courtesy would avail against my good
sword , once I could sink it in his treacherous heart . ' 

As soon as Sir Gawaine might walk and ride , he armed him at all points
and mounted a great courser , and with a long wide spear in his hand he
went spurring to the great gate of the town . 

 ' Where art thou , Lancelot ? ' he cried in a fierce voice .  ' Come thou
forth , traitor knight and recreant ! I am here to revenge me on thy evil
body for thy treacherous slaughter of my twain brothers . ' 

All this language Sir Lancelot heard , and leaning from the tower he
thus spake : 

 ' Sir Gawaine , it sorrows me that ye will not cease your foul speaking . 
I know your might , and all that ye may do , and well ye wot ye may do me
great hurt or death . ' 

 ' Come down , then , ' cried Sir Gawaine ,  ' for what my heart craves is to
slay thee . Thou didst get the better of me the other day , and I come
this day to get my revenge . And wit thee well I will lay thee as low as
thou didst lay me . ' 

 ' I will not keep ye waiting long , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' for as ye charge
me of treachery ye shall have your hands full of me erelong , however
the battle between us may end . ' 

Then happened it even as before . The knights encountered first with
spears , but Sir Gawaine ' s broke into a hundred pieces on the shield of
Sir Lancelot . Then , dismounting , the knights fought on foot with
swords . 

Sir Gawaine put forth all his strength , hoping , with the magic power
which he possessed , to dash Sir Lancelot to his knees . But Sir Lancelot
was more wary than before , and under cover of his shield he husbanded
his strength until the hour of noon , when , as before , he felt that Sir
Gawaine ' s might had strangely ebbed away . 

When that had come to pass , Sir Lancelot said : 

 ' Now once more have I proved that ye fight not with a man ' s fair
strength , Sir Gawaine , but with some evil power . And full grievously
was I put to it to withstand many of thy sad blows . Now ye have done
your great deeds , and I will do mine . ' 

Then with one stroke , of so marvellous a force that men marvelled , Sir
Lancelot beat down Sir Gawaine ' s guard , and struck him a full heavy
blow on the side of the helm , beating it in so that the old wound burst
again . 

Sir Gawaine fell to the ground , and for some moments lay still as if he
were dead or in a swoon; but he was only dazed , and soon recovering , he
raved and foamed as he lay there , cursing Sir Lancelot for a traitorous
coward and a base knight , and even , in his madness , thrusting towards
him with his sword . 

 ' Wit thou well , base knight , ' he cried ,  ' that I am not slain yet . Come
thou near and lie here with me , and we will fight this battle until we
die . ' 

 ' I will do no more than I have done , my lord , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' and
when thou art able to stand I will meet thee again . But to smite a
wounded man that may not stand , I will not . ' 

Then Sir Lancelot withdrew to the town , while Sir Gawaine still raved
and abused him , and men marvelled both at the exceeding madness of the
hatred of Sir Gawaine and the great restraint and nobleness of
Lancelot . Many said that had Sir Gawaine said half as many shameful
things to one of them , they would have instantly rased his evil head
from his shoulders . 

For a month Sir Gawaine lay sick , but was always eager to be up and
able again . And at length the leech said that in three days he should
ride , whereat Sir Gawaine was joyful . 

 ' Again , ' said he to King Arthur , who sat beside him ,  ' again shall I
have to do with that base fellow , and ill attend me if I do not end the
matter this time . ' 

 ' Ye had ended it long ago , or been ended , ' said the king ,  ' except for
the nobleness of Sir Lancelot that forbore to slay you . ' 

 ' Ay , we all know your love of the pestilent fool , uncle , ' said Sir
Gawaine ,  ' but we will stay here until we have made an end of him and
his kingdom , if it take us all our lives . ' 

Even as he spoke there came the clear call of a trumpet outside in the
camp , and Sir Bedevere came to the door of the king ' s tent , his grim
old face pale , his grizzled hair unkempt , and every sign of haste and
travel upon his dress . 

The king started up .  ' Sir Bedevere , ye bring evil tidings from
Britain , ' he cried .  ' Can it be that more ruin and wrong is to come than
that I suffer now ? What is your news ? ' 

 ' O my king , it is that Mordred your nephew hath rebelled , ' said Sir
Bedevere ,  ' and has gathered much people about him , and hath sent many
letters to all the lords and knights your vassals , promising them
wealth and lands if they make him king . And Gwenevere your queen he
hath imprisoned , saying that he will wed her when ye are slain . ' 

 ' Mordred ! Mordred ! ' cried the king ,  ' him that I thought was a quiet , 
strong man--turned so base a traitor ! ' 

 ' Ay , he was ever the traitor , though brother of mine , ' cried Sir
Gawaine in a voice of rage .  ' A man that speaks in whispers , haunts dark
corners , and ever sneers with his lips . ' 

 ' Hardly with my life have I escaped to tell you this , ' went on Sir
Bedevere ,  ' for he placed men to watch me after I had scorned his evil
offers to myself . But now , my lord , quickly ye must betake yourself and
all your army from this fruitless and wrongful War against Sir
Lancelot , and hasten to beat down the poisonous viper whom ye have
nourished in your bosom . ' 

Ere the day was done the army of King Arthur had raised the siege of
Sir Lancelot ' s town and were quickly marching to the sea , there to take
their boats across to Britain to punish the usurper and traitor , Sir
Mordred . 

A fair wind carried them across the sea , but long ere they reached the
shallows of the beach at Dover they saw the sunlight flashing from
thousands of headpieces of knights and men-at-arms , set to oppose the
landing of their rightful lord . The king was fiercely angry , and he
commanded the masters of the ships to launch their small boats , and
into these the knights swarmed and were rowed towards the shore . 

But the rebels of Mordred also launched boats and great pinnaces filled
with knights , and when the boats of the opposite parties met , then
there was fierce fighting and much slaughter of many good knights and
barons and other brave men . Then King Arthur and his chief knights drew
forth their horses from the holds of the ships , and leaped with them
into the sea , and fiercely did they throw themselves upon Sir Mordred
and his knights , and there was grievous fighting on horseback in the
shallow water , which soon was dyed with the blood of the slain . 

So stubborn were the king and his fighting men that the army of Mordred
was forced to retreat towards the land , and then , when the king and
Gawaine had trimmed their own ranks , order was given for one concerted
rush against the enemy . The other side showed little fight now , and
made no stand , but fled inland . 

When the battle was over , King Arthur let bury his people that were
dead , so far as they could be discovered in the waves; and the wounded
he caused to be carried into the town of Dover to be cared for . 

A squire came to the king as he stood giving orders as to these things . 

 ' My lord king , ' said the squire ,  ' Sir Gawaine lies sore wounded in a
boat , and we know not whether he be alive or dead . ' 

 ' Alas ! ' cried the king , and the knights about him were full of pity at
the sudden grief that came into his voice and his looks ,  ' is this true ? 
Then is all my joy of life at an end . ' 

The squire led him to the boat in which Sir Gawaine lay , who stirred as
the king approached , and feebly smiled . 

 ' My uncle , ' said Sir Gawaine ,  ' wit you well that now is my death-day
come , for I know I shall not last this bout . For I am smitten upon the
wound which Sir Lancelot gave me , and I feel that now I shall die . ' 

 ' Alas , my sister ' s son , ' cried the king , taking Sir Gawaine in his arms
and kissing him , while the tears flowed down his cheeks ,  ' this is the
wofullest day of all my life . For if ye depart , Gawaine , how solitary
am I ! Gawaine ! Gawaine ! in Sir Lancelot and in thee had I most my love
and my joy , and now shall I lose ye both , and all my earthly joy is
gone from me . ' 

 ' Alas , ' said Sir Gawaine ,  ' sorrow ' s on me now that I have caused you
such grief , mine uncle . I see now that I have been mad with rage
against that noble knight , Sir Lancelot , who slew my dear brothers
unwittingly . And now I repent me sorely . I would that I could live to
repair the evil that I have done to you and to Sir Lancelot . But my
time is come . I shall not live till evening . ' 

They wept together , and the knights that stood about them also wept for
pure grief , to think how much sorrow and ruin was caused by the mad
rage of Sir Gawaine , which had pushed the good king on to make war
against his will . 

 ' I am the causer of this rebellion by my traitor brother , ' said Sir
Gawaine ,  ' and my name shall be cursed for it . Had I not wilfully driven
thee , thou wouldst have accorded with Sir Lancelot , and he and his
brave kinsmen would have held your cankered enemies in subjection , or
else cut them utterly away . Lift me up , my lord , and let me have a
scribe , for I will send a letter to Sir Lancelot ere I die . ' 

Then Sir Gawaine was set up by the king , and a priest was brought , who
wrote at the dying man ' s dictation . And the purport of the letter was
in this wise : 

 ' Unto Sir Lancelot , flower of all noble knights that ever I heard of or
saw , and once my dear friend , now do I , Sir Gawaine , King Lot ' s son of
Orkney and the Lothians , and sister ' s son to King Arthur , send thee
greeting and let thee know by these writings that I am this day done to
death , having been wounded at the landing against rebellious traitors , 
and struck upon the wound which thou didst give me twice , before thy
city . Whereby I have got my death . But I will have thee to wit that I
sought my death of thee , and got that wound deservedly of thee , who
could have slain me twice , but for thy high nobility and great
courtesy . I , Gawaine , beseech of thee forgiveness for my madness , and
crave that thou wilt remember the dear friendly days we have had
together in times long past , and for all the love that was between us . 
Come thou over the sea , and with thy knights do thou press to the help
of Arthur , our noble lord , who is beset by a traitorous villain , my
brother Mordred , who hath dared to rebel against his rightful lord , and
hath crowned himself king . Do thou hasten , good Sir Lancelot , when thou
shalt receive this letter , and follow the king . But ere thou goest from
this seashore do thou come to my tomb , and pray some prayer more or
less for my sinful soul , that in its madness did evilly entreat thee . ' 

Then was Sir Gawaine shriven , and in a little while he swooned , while
all stood uncovered round about him . When the rays of the afternoon sun
cast long shadows of the knights and fighting men who were hurrying up
and down the shore making ready to depart , Sir Gawaine awoke from his
swoon and looked up . For a moment he did not recognise King Arthur;
then he smiled at him very sweetly and said in a low voice : 

 ' Kiss me--and forgive me ! ' 

The king knelt down and kissed the pallid face of Sir Gawaine , and for
very sorrow he felt that the heart in his breast was nigh to bursting . 

So in a little while , with the beat of the surf and the cry of the
seagulls upon his ears , the light of the sun in his eyes , and the free
air of heaven all about him , Sir Gawaine died . And his death was as he
had ever craved it to be , under the open sky , after battle , where he
had given good strokes and received them . 

Now the letter which Sir Gawaine had written was given unto a young
squire of Sir Gawaine ' s , by name Tewder , and he was commanded to depart
forthwith back to Brittany , and deliver it into the hands of Sir
Lancelot . But , among the knights that had stood about the dying Sir
Gawaine , was a traitor , who was in the service of Sir Mordred the
rebel , and he knew that if Sir Lancelot should receive that letter , and
come to Britain with all his brave kin and their host , Sir Mordred
would have much ado to conquer King Arthur . 

Therefore the traitor knight , whose name was Sir Fergus , did accost
Tewder the squire , and with fair seeming told him that he also was
bidden to go back to Brittany , to bring back certain jewels which the
king in his hasty departure had left in his lodging at the town of Dol . 

Tewder , unsuspecting of all evil , went aboard a boat with Sir Fergus , 
and together they bargained with the master to take them across when
the tide should rise again at dark . Together they crossed the sea that
night and took the road towards Sir Lancelot ' s town; and in a dark wood
Sir Fergus set upon the squire , who fought bravely , but was slain at
last , and the letter of Sir Gawaine was taken by the traitor . 

Then , returning to the seashore , the wretch went aboard another boat , 
and chaffered with the merchant to take him across the sea to the town
of Llongporth , whence he thought to get quickly to Mordred , to receive
from him the reward of his treachery and murder . But at night , as they
sailed over the dark sea , a fifty-oared longship , filled with Saxon
pirates , crept upon them; the pagans poured over the sides , slew men
almost in their sleep , and flung their bodies overboard . And though
Fergus fought well , his head was almost struck from his body by a great
sheering axe-blow . When the pirates had taken all the goods they
desired from the merchant vessel , they stove a hole in its side , and it
sank to the bottom of the sea . So that no man ever again saw the letter
which was meant for Sir Lancelot . 

For some weeks Sir Lancelot lay quiet , knowing naught of the death of
Sir Gawaine or of the letter desiring him to go to the help of King
Arthur . Many rumours came to him , through the ship-folk , of the wicked
rebellion of Sir Mordred , and though Sir Lancelot longed to go across
to Britain and fight for King Arthur , his kinsmen would not consent , 
but said it would be unseemly , unless the king craved his aid , and sued
for pardon for making war against Sir Lancelot in his own country . 

Thus the precious weeks went by , and much ill fortune happened in
Britain , that had ended otherwise if Sir Lancelot had been by the king . 

Three days after the battle upon the shore , the king ' s host came up
with the host of Sir Mordred on Barham down . Many folks had joined the
rebels ' side , because they hated the king for making war upon Sir
Lancelot , and the king was sorely hurt in his mind to see a banner
borne by one part of the usurper ' s army , on which was the device of Sir
Lancelot ' s . 

This the crafty Sir Mordred had commanded to be done , knowing that it
would damp the spirits of King Arthur and his men . 

 ' Verily , ' said King Arthur ,  ' my evil deeds have sprung up as armed men
against me . I fought unjustly with Sir Lancelot , and here are some that
loved him arrayed against me for that wicked war . ' 

 ' If ye would send for Sir Lancelot , ' said Sir Owen of the Fountain , who
stood by him ,  ' ye would learn , I verily believe , that Sir Lancelot
loves and worships you as of old , and hath no mind to fight on the side
of this sly fox , Mordred . Send for Sir Lancelot , lord . ' 

 ' Nay , I will not--I may not , ' said the king .  ' If he cometh by the words
which Sir Gawaine wrote to him , I shall know that he loves me and
forgives me; but if he cometh not , I shall know he hates me , and I
shall merit his ill-favour . He owes naught to me since I used him so
evilly , and therefore I may not ask his aid . ' 

All day the battle raged upon the great green down , and many were the
fierce fights which took place upon the top thereof , where , behind
great earthworks freshly timbered , the main host of Sir Mordred stood , 
the banner of the great red dragon in their midst . 

But at the last , so fast and fierce did the blows of King Arthur ' s men
fall , and so stubbornly did they press on , that Sir Mordred ' s host gave
way . Pouring forth by the upper gate , they ran pell-mell northwards , 
and the knights and fighting men of Arthur kept up with them for many
miles , and there was a running fight and much wounding and slaying all
through the fresh green countryside , where the hedges were laden with
May-blossoms , and in the sky the larks were trilling . 

And that day many a wounded man crawled groaning into the thickets to
die , many a chalky cart-rut ran red with blood , and many a white face , 
with wide-open , sightless eyes , stared up at the blue sky , where the
fleecy clouds sailed in the gentle wind . 

For three weeks after this battle both sides rested , and like great
wrestlers gathered all their strength for one great struggle . Knights
and riders were sent by both sides into all parts , with letters to
lords and knights , charging them to take their sides in the war . Many
people from about London came to the banner of Mordred , and the parts
now called Kent , Sussex and Surrey , Essex and Suffolk held wholly with
him; but those in the west , as Wales , Devon , Cornwall and the middle
parts , thronged to the banner of the king . 

Few came from the north , for there the pagan pirates stalked with fire
and sword through and through the land , and the British lords and
chiefs that were alive had little power to stay them now . King Uriens
was dead , slain by the dagger of a traitor , and so were two other great
chieftains; so that men south of Trent sorrowfully shook their heads
and said that now the north was no longer the land of the British folk , 
but was given over to the savage heathen hordes . 

Then , to meet the many that flocked together in his favour , King Arthur
drew him with his host westward beyond Sarum . There on the wide downs
beside the great standing-stones of the Old Princes , which men now call
Stonehenge , a great multitude of chiefs and knights and yeomen came to
his banner . 

But Sir Mordred avoided a battle , and , instead , kept aloof with his
army , and began to burn and harry the country which was on the side of
Arthur . He took Calleva and Cunetio , and put the people to the sword , 
and took much gear from those wealthy cities; then he stole through the
great forest by night and came to Palladun , which was a rich town
builded upon the top of a great hill . He thought to take this unawares , 
but it was well watched and well armed , and he strove to break into it
and was kept about it for some days . 

That delay was used well by King Arthur , for he made great haste to
pass through the wild country , filled with wide marshes and thick woods
as it was , which separated him from his enemy . Then Mordred , hearing
through the spies of the king ' s approach , got his host away and thought
to pass into the lands of Devon , which were those of King Dewer , son of
the dead Geraint , and held firmly for Arthur . 

But in the wild waste-land beside the Endless Waters , King Arthur
caught up with him , and barred his further way . And the king remembered
that this was that same land , full of gaunt standing-stones and haunted
by trolls and witches , where Merlin had once led him , and where he had
gained the sword Excalibur . 

It was late in the day when the two armies faced each other , and both
prepared to pass the night upon the field . Bitter was the wind that
evening , and the skies were dun and leaden of hue , as if spring had
been overcome by winter; and to shelter the king a tent had been put up
in a little dark wood of stunted firs , called the Wood of Drood . Just
in the deep dark before the dawn , when the blood in men ' s veins was
coldest , and the life in their hearts was weakest , a dreadful cry
wailed out through the dark wood , and there came the sound as of
leathery wings flapping heavily to and fro above where the king lay
sleeping . Men started up about their ashen fires , their faces blanching
at the terror that cried in the dark , and they heard the wailing twice
repeated , while none dared try to see the thing that wailed . 

Then , while their blood chilled and their breath stayed , they heard the
heavy flapping pass over their heads and die away towards the camp of
Mordred; and there in the distance did the three cries sound again . 

Men ' s hearts sickened as they turned and crept the nearer to each
other , but few dared to utter the words upon their lips . 

Two knights slept in the tent with king , Sir Kay and Sir Owen; and they
lay in the dark , trembling at the cries of terrible import . When they
passed , the knights would not move , fearing to be the first to speak . 

 ' My Lords , ' came the quiet voice of King Arthur out of the dark ,  ' that
was the voice of the Hag of Warning . Men say it hath foretold the
deaths of many of my house , but I know not . Yet will I take the issue
as God shall give it me , trusting in His mercy and the blood of His Son
Jesus , and Him crucified . ' 

 ' Amen , ' said the two knights , and said no more . 

When , in a little while , the sun rose , flashing his warm rays into the
fearful eyes that greeted him , men ' s terror quickly vanished; and when
fires were lit and oaten cakes were browning on the irons , or collops
sputtered on their skewers , tongues were loosened and faces began to
smile . But few spoke of the cries which they had heard , for all loved
their king , and hoped that somehow they had dreamed an evil dream , or
had but heard the cries of some foul night-bird . 

Breakfast being ended , the captains and knights began to trim their men
in army array , and talk was eager of the coming battle . Then were seen , 
coming from Sir Mordred ' s camp , two bishops; and these were taken at
their desire to Arthur , where he stood surrounded by his knights and
chieftains . 

 ' Lord , ' said one of the bishops , he that was head of the great choir or
monastery of Amesbury ,  ' cannot we make accord between you and your
nephew ? Sad it is to see so many great and valiant warriors ranged
against each other . Many are sisters ' sons , and all are of one speech , 
one kindred . If this unnatural war doth continue , how much sorrow there
will be , how many noble hearts be stilled in death or broken in grief
for him that shall never return ! How many puissant bodies , now quick
and passionate and handsome , will be meat for snarling wolves and
carrion for foul birds ! ' 

 ' What says my rebellious nephew ? ' asked the king sternly . 

 ' My lord , ' said the other bishop , a man of soft and silky speech , and
he was chief of the choir of Clovesho ,  ' he asks but little , and if ye
are willing to make treaty , he also is willing . Grant him but the
earldom of Kent and the Andred , with a seat at London , during your
days , and do thou appoint him king after your days . For now that Sir
Gawaine , Sir Gaheris and Sir Gareth are slain , he is the only sister ' s
son you have . If ye grant these things he will be your liege , faithful
in all things , and a strong arm against your enemies . ' 

Then some of King Arthur ' s knights would have him agree to these terms , 
but others would not , and said the king should make no treaty with a
traitor , but that Mordred should come and throw himself upon the mercy
of his king and uncle . 

At the last , after much counsel had been taken , King Arthur agreed to
meet Mordred , with fourteen of his chief men , in the space betwixt
their hosts , and the king should also take fourteen knights with him . 
So the bishops went back with this message , and King Arthur called the
chieftains of his host about him . 

 ' I go to see this traitor , my nephew , ' he said to them ,  ' whether he
means falsely or truly with this talk of a treaty . But look ye , I in no
wise trust him . Hold ye your men warily , and if ye see any sword drawn
among us where we stand , do thou sound the horns of attack and come on
fiercely , and slay that rebel and all that hold with him . ' 

In like wise did Mordred warn his men ,  ' for , ' said he , knowing how
greatly he had sinned against his generous and noble uncle ,  ' I know
well that King Arthur and his knights would be avenged on me if they
could . ' 

The party from each army went forward over the stony hillside , until
they met midway between the armies , and men watched them keenly . King
Arthur spoke chidingly to his nephew Mordred , who , sour and dark of
face , looked craftily at the faces of his uncle and his knights . And
the chiefs with Mordred , men for the most part of violent and ambitious
natures , looked haughtily at King Arthur ' s party . Nevertheless , there
was no bad blood shown , and the talk was continued , and Mordred
repeated the demands which the bishops had made . 

 ' But I care not to give to thee Kent and London , ' said the king .  ' I
tell thee frankly , Mordred , I would not trust thee there . I fear me
thou wouldst try some crafty plot with the Saxon pagans if I gave them
thee , as that rebel Caros did , who for a time made himself emperor of
the Romans here in this land . ' 

 ' Ha ' done , then , my father , ' said Gorfalk , the son of Mordred , an
insolent young man .  ' Let us cease this . I doubt not we be big enough to
get all the kingdom if we fight . ' 

The king looked sternly at the young man , and there was silence among
them all as men waited for Arthur ' s reply . 

Then it happened that a young chieftain , standing near the king , felt
something bite his foot where the low leathern shoe left it naked . He
looked down and saw that he was treading on a viper , which had struck
him and was about to strike again . With a cry the knight stepped aside , 
drew his sword , and cut the reptile in two . 

As the blade flashed , silvery bright in the sunlight , a great hoarse
cry rose like thunder from the two masses of men watching them on
either side; trumpets blared and horns squealed , and shouts of command
rose sharp and keen . 

Instantly the men standing with Arthur and Mordred looked about them , 
saw where the young chieftain stood with drawn sword , and knew that now
nothing could avert the battle . 

 ' The gods will have it so ! ' sneered Mordred . 

Already the earth trembled and shook with the beat of ten thousand feet
of the armies rushing together . A knight of Mordred ' s , drawing his
sword , thrust it into the breast of one of Arthur ' s chieftains , with
the cry : 

 ' This for thy land , Sir Digon , that marches with mine ! ' 

Instantly others fell to fighting hand-to-hand , striking on targe and
helm; but Sir Owen , Sir Kay and Sir Bedevere surrounded the king , and
all hurried back to the army approaching them . So likewise did Sir
Mordred . 

Then came the crash of battle , as line on line , with flashing swords
held high , the ranks of war closed . Blades rose again , stained red , 
fierce strangled cries came from men in the death-grips , helms were
cracked , shields riven , dirks sank home , and men who once had drunk and
jested with laughing looks over the same mead-board , now met fierce eye
to eye , and never parted until one or both fell in the swaths of the
death-harvest . 

All day the stubborn battle raged , and ever the king sought out the
rebel Mordred , but never reached him . Many valiant deeds he did , 
wielding his sword Excalibur; and by his side were Owen and Kay , Lucan
and Bedevere . So spent were they at the last that hardly could they
lift their swords , and so sick of the slaying were they that gladly
would they have ceased . But ever some vicious band of Mordred ' s knights
would come upon them , and then they quitted them like men , and ceased
not till their enemies had fled or were slain . 

Suddenly the king came to himself , and , standing still , looked upon the
field . In the morning it had been but a bare hillside of hungry , 
stunted grass , through which the stones showed grey and sallow , like
ancient bones . Now , in the low light of the sinking orb , it was
red--red , with the pallid faces of the dead stained a lighter red in
the rays of the sun . Here and there bands still fought together , cries
of fury rose , and the groans of the dying mingled with them . 

 ' Alas ! ' cried the king , and looked behind him ,  ' where are all my noble
knights ? ' 

There were but two with him now , Lucan and his brother Bedevere . 

 ' Where is Owen , and Kay ? ' he asked . 

 ' Alas , lord , ' said Bedevere ,  ' Sir Owen got his death-wound by the thorn
where we fought those five knights but now , and Sir Kay suddenly fell
as he walked . And when I knelt to speak to him , I found him dead . ' 

 ' Alas , ' said the king ,  ' that ever I should see this doleful day , for
now is my end come . But would to Heaven that I wist where is that
traitor Mordred , that hath caused all this sorrow and ruin . ' 

Then , as he spoke , he looked towards the east , and saw where , by a tall
standing-stone , a man leaned as if spent with a wound . And he was aware
that this was Mordred . 

 ' Now give me my spear , ' said the king to Sir Lucan ,  ' for yonder is the
traitor , and he shall not escape me . ' 

 ' Lord , ' said Sir Lucan in a weak voice ,  ' let him bide , for he hath none
with him , while we three are still alive . ' 

 ' Now , betide me death , betide me life , ' said the king ,  ' now that I see
him yonder I will slay the serpent , lest he live to work more havoc on
this my poor kingdom . ' 

 ' God speed you well , ' said Sir Bedevere , and gave the king his spear . 

Then the king ran towards Sir Mordred , crying : 

 ' Traitor , prepare , now is thy death-day come ! ' 

When Sir Mordred heard King Arthur he raised his head , then came
towards the king with his sword in his hand . 

And there , in the shadow of the great stone , King Arthur smote Sir
Mordred under the shield , with so keen a stroke of his spear that it
went through the body and out beyond . Sir Mordred , feeling that death
was upon him , thrust himself along the spear almost to the butt
thereof , nigh where King Arthur held it , and grasping his sword in both
his hands , he struck his uncle on the side of the head , with so keen
and fierce a blow that the sword pierced the helm and the skull . 

With that stroke Sir Mordred fell stark dead to the earth , and the king
sank in a swoon upon his body . 

Then Sir Bedevere and Sir Lucan , who were both sore wounded and weakly , 
came up , and between them , with many rests upon the way , took the king
to a little combe beside the waters , and there they took off his helm
and bathed his wound and bound it . After which the king felt easier . 

 ' We may do naught else with thee here , lord , ' said Sir Lucan ,  ' and it
were best that we got thee to some town . ' 

 ' It would be better so , ' said the king ,  ' but I fear me I have my
death-wound . ' 

When they had rested Sir Lucan tried to rise , so as to take up the
king . 

 ' I may not rise , ' he cried , his hands upon his head ,  ' my brain works
so . ' 

Nevertheless , the knight staggered to his feet and lifted up the feet
of the king . But the effort was too much for him , and with a deathly
groan he fell to the ground , and when he had twitched and struggled a
little he lay dead . 

 ' Alas , ' said the king ,  ' this is to me a full heavy sight , to see this
noble knight so die for my sake . He would not complain , so set was he
to help me , and now his heart has broken . ' 

Then Sir Bedevere went to his brother and kissed him , and closed his
eyes . 

 ' Now , ' said the king ,  ' come hither to me , Bedevere , for my time goeth
fast and I remember me of a promise . Therefore , ' he bade Sir Bedevere , 
 ' do thou take Excalibur , my good sword , and go with it beyond the combe
side there where a low thorn grows , and when thou comest there , I
charge thee , throw my sword in that water , and come again and tell me
what thou seest . ' 

So Sir Bedevere departed with the sword , and on the way he looked at
the sword , and saw how noble was the blade and how shining , and how the
pommel and haft were full of precious stones . 

 ' If I throw this sword into the water , ' said Sir Bedevere to himself , 
 ' how great a sin  ' twould be to waste so noble a weapon . ' 

Therefore he hid it in the branches of the thorn and returned to the
king . 

 ' What sawest thou ? ' asked the king when Bedevere returned . 

 ' Sir , ' he said ,  ' I saw the wind beat on the waves . ' 

 ' Ye have not done as I bid thee , ' said the king .  ' Now , therefore , do
thou go again and do as I bid thee; and as thou art dear to me , spare
it not , but throw it in . ' 

Then Sir Bedevere went back and took the sword in his hand; but again
he could not bring himself to throw away that noble sword , so again he
hid the sword and went back to the king . 

 ' What sawest thou this time ? ' said the king . 

 ' Lord , ' said Bedevere ,  ' I saw the waters ebb and flow and the sedges
trembling . ' 

 ' Ah , traitor untrue ! ' said the king , deep sorrow in his voice ,  ' who
would have weened that thou who hast been so true and dear to me , and
who hast been named a noble knight , would betray me for the jewels on a
sword ? Now go ye again , I charge thee , and as thou shalt answer for thy
sins at the last day , throw ye the sword far into the waters . ' 

Then in heavy mood Sir Bedevere went the third time , and took the sword
from its hiding-place , and looking away from the weapon lest its beauty
should soften him , he bound the girdle about the hilt , and then he
threw the sword with all his might far out over the water . 

As he looked , inwardly lamenting , he saw the jewels flash in the low
light as the sword passed through the air . Then suddenly , when it
neared the water , he marvelled to see a great arm and hand come up
through the waves . The hand caught the weapon by the haft , shook it and
brandished it thrice , and then vanished with the sword under the waves . 

With some fear in his heart Sir Bedevere went back to the king and told
him all that he had seen . 

 ' It is well , ' said the king .  ' Now have I performed my promise . Help me
hence to some village , for I am cold and would die beneath a roof , if I
may . ' 

Then Sir Bedevere took the king upon his back , thinking that he would
find some road in a little while which should lead them to a hamlet . 
And as he went along , he passed by the waterside , near the low thorn
whence he had thrown the sword into the water . 

There , in the sedges , he marvelled to see a barge draped all in black
cloth , and in it sat many fair ladies , all with black hoods on . When
they saw Sir Bedevere with the king upon his back , they shrieked and
wept . 

And one that looked a queen , so fair and stately , yet so sad was she , 
held out her arms towards the king , and cried unto him in a voice
wondrous sweet ,  ' Come to me , brother ! ' 

 ' Put me into the barge , ' said the king to Bedevere ,  ' for there I shall
have rest . ' 

Softly did Sir Bedevere lay him in the barge , and the fair ladies wept
over the king with much mourning , and one laid his head in her lap and
caressed it with soft hands . 

Then , without sails or oars , the barge went from the shore , and fear
and sorrow shook the soul of Sir Bedevere to see them go from him . 

 ' Alas , my lord Arthur , ' he cried ,  ' what shall become of me if ye are
leaving me lonely ? ' 

 ' Comfort thyself , ' said the king in a faint voice ,  ' and do as well as
thou mayest , for in me ye may no longer trust . For I will go into the
vale of Avalon to heal me of my grievous wound , and if thou hear never
more of me , pray for my soul . ' 

Sir Bedevere stood watching till the barge went from his sight in the
mists of evening , and then he wept a little , and so fared forward
through the night , weeping as he thought how all the glory that was
Arthur ' s was now past , and how he himself was very old and very lonely . 

When morning broke he was aware of a little chapel and a hermitage
between two hoar woods upon a knoll beside the marshes , and entering
therein he got cheer of the holy hermit and rested . 

 * * * * *

Now , when King Arthur had gone westwards to collect his host , Sir Owen , 
marvelling that Sir Lancelot had sent no word in reply to the letter of
Sir Gawaine , had charged a trusty squire of his to go across to
Brittany , to tell Sir Lancelot of all that had passed and how King
Arthur longed for his aid and his love . Nigh mad with grief was Sir
Lancelot when he had learned all , and so deep was his sorrow and so
wild was his regret , that hardly could he wait till the ships were
ready to take him and his knights and army across to Britain . 

When they arrived at Dover , Sir Lancelot sought out the tomb of Sir
Gawaine , and there with much weeping he prayed long and earnestly for
the repose of the soul of that dead warrior , his once dear friend . All
the other knights prayed likewise for the soul of Gawaine , and Sir
Lancelot gave one hundred pounds for masses to be said , and the others
gave according to their means . 

Then word was brought him of the daylong dreadful battle in the west , 
and how King Arthur was gone , mortally wounded , none knew whither , and
how all the knights of the Round Table were dead . 

Silent was Sir Lancelot at this news , but men saw how his stern face
paled; and for a time he walked apart and would suffer none to speak to
him . Then he came to his knights , and all could see how his looks had
changed . Grief was deeply lined upon his face , and he had the air of an
aged and weary man . 

 ' My fair lords , ' he said ,  ' I thank you all for your coming with me , but
we came too late . But now I go alone to find the body of my dear lord , 
and if I may , I will see my lady , Queen Gwenevere . And do ye all go
back into your country , for now we have no place in this . ' 

Thus Sir Lancelot fared forth , and would suffer none to go with him . 
First he went to Amesbury , and in the convent there he saw Queen
Gwenevere . Few but very sad were the words they spake . Sir Lancelot
offered to give her a home in Brittany , away from the trouble and the
ruin of the land , but she would not . 

 ' My lord is dead , ' she said , weeping ,  ' and this dear kingdom may not
long stand , but while I live I will stay on its dear soil . ' 

Then Sir Lancelot fared far west through the wastelands , and came to
the battlefield; and there he wept sorely to see the long lines of
dead . Many were the dead knights of the Round Table whom he found
unburied , and these with his own hands he laid in the grave , and he
procured a priest to say prayers over them . 

Further he went beside the shores of the Endless Waters , until one day
he found a black barge , and stepping therein he was taken without sail
or oars far over the wide sea , until the twilight . Then , raising his
sorrowing eyes , he was aware of a fair green island with a valley
between two sweet hills , and there was a chapel , and all about it were
trees all laden with blossoms . 

A little bell began to ring just as the barge lightly touched the
shore , and stepping therefrom , Sir Lancelot went into the chapel , and
heard mass . Afterwards a bishop came unto him where he kneeled , and a
hermit , and the latter seized his hand; and when he looked up Sir
Lancelot knew it for Sir Bedevere . Neither could speak for the great
tears that rolled down their grim faces , but Sir Bedevere drew him
forth and led him to where a great white marble slab was lying , freshly
cut , in the midmost part of the chapel . 

Thereon Sir Lancelot saw the words , cut deep and wide , in black
letters : 

 HIC JACET

 ARTHURUS REX

 QUONDAM REX QUE FUTURUS

Then did Sir Lancelot ' s heart almost burst with sorrow; and when he had
finished praying and weeping , he kneeled unto the bishop and prayed him
to shrive him and assoil him . Afterwards he besought him that he might
live with him , and the holy man granted his request , and there ever
after did Sir Lancelot , putting off all the fame and glory which he had
gotten in the world , pass all his days and nights , serving God with
prayers and fastings and much abstinence . 

When , within a year , Queen Gwenevere died in her cell at Amesbury , Sir
Lancelot , having been advised in a dream of her death , braved the bands
of lawless men that now ravaged the fair land of Britain , and brought
her body to the isle of Glastonbury . He laid it solemnly beside the
body of her dear lord Arthur , and thereafter he endured greater
penance . 

 ' For , ' said he ,  ' by my stiffnecked pride did all this evil come . If I
had gone straightway to my dear lord , and cast myself upon his love and
justice , my lady the queen would not have been led to the stake , and I
should not unwittingly have slain young Gareth . I am the causer of all
the ruin and the sorrow that hath come upon this land , and never while
I live may I forgive me . ' 

Thus evermore he prayed and mourned , day and night , but sometimes he
slumbered a broken sleep . He ate but little , and neither the bishop nor
Sir Bedevere could make him take comfort . And if you would know the
time and place where Lancelot was happiest , it was when he was lying on
the tomb of King Arthur and Queen Gwenevere . 

At last , on a sweet morn in June , they found him lying there , stark
dead , but with a gentle smile upon his wasted face . And when they had
made the mass of requiem , they laid him in the tomb at the feet of the
king and the queen , and on the slab that covered him they caused these
words to be graven : 

 HERE LIETH
 SIR LANCELOT DU LAKE
 WHO WAS CHIEF OF ALL CHRISTIAN KNIGHTS;
 THE MOST COURTEOUS MAN AND THE TRUEST
 FRIEND , THE MEEKEST DOER OF GREAT DEEDS , 
 AND THE GENTLEST TO ALL LADIES AND
 WEAK CREATURES . 
 R . I . P . 

