IT was all Sweetheart ' s fault , and this is how it came about . 

She and I were at Dryburgh Abbey , sitting quietly on a rustic seat , and
looking toward the aisle in which slept the Great Dead . The long
expected had happened , and we had made pilgrimage to our Mecca . Yet , in
spite of the still beauty of the June day , I could see that a shadow lay
upon our Sweetheart ' s brow . 

 " Oh , I know he was great , " she burst out at last ,  " and what you read me
out of the _Life_ was nice . I like hearing about Sir Walter--but-- " 

I knew what was coming . 

 " But what ? " I said , looking severely at the ground , so that I might be
able to harden my heart against the pathos of Sweetheart ' s expression . 

 " But--I can ' t read the novels--indeed I can ' t . I have tried _Waverley_
at least twenty times . And as for _Rob Roy_-- " 

Even the multiplication table failed here , and at this , variously
a-sprawl on the turf beneath , the smaller fry giggled . 

 " Course , " said Hugh John , who was engaged in eating grass like an ox , 
 " we know it is true about _Rob Roy_ . She read us one whole volume , and
there wasn ' t no Rob Roy , nor any fighting in it . So we pelted her with
fir-cones to make her stop and read over _Treasure Island_ to us
instead ! " 

 " Yes , though we had heard it twenty times already , " commented Sir Toady
Lion , trying his hardest to pinch his brother ' s legs on the sly . 

 " Books wifout pictures is silly ! " said a certain Maid Margaret , a
companion new to the honourable company , who was weaving daisy-chains , 
her legs crossed beneath her , Turk fashion . In literature she had got as
far as words of one syllable , and had a poor opinion even of them . 

 " _I_ had read all Scott ' s novels long before I was your age , " I said
reprovingly . 

The children received this announcement with the cautious silence with
which every rising generation listens to the experiences of its elders
when retailed by way of odious comparison . 

 " Um-m ! " said Sir Toady , the licensed in speech;  " _we_ know all that . Oh , 
yes; and you didn ' t like fruit , and you liked medicine in a big spoon , 
and eating porridge and-- " 

 " Oh , we know--we know ! " cried all the others in chorus . Whereupon I
informed them what would have happened to us thirty years ago if we had
ventured to address our parents in such fashion . But Sweetheart , with
the gravity of her age upon her , endeavoured to raise the discussion to
its proper level . 

 " Scott writes such a lot before you get at the story , " she objected , 
knitting her brows;  " why couldn ' t he just have begun right away ? " 

 " With Squire Trelawney and Dr . Livesey drawing at their pipes in the
oak-pannelled dining room , and Black Dog outside the door , and Pew
coming tapping along the road with his stick ! " cried Hugh John , turning
off a sketchy synopsis of his favourite situations in fiction . 

 " Now that ' s what I call a proper book ! " said Sir Toady , hastily rolling
himself out of the way of being kicked .  ( For with these unusual
children , the smooth ordinary upper surfaces of life covered a constant
succession of private wars and rumours of wars , which went on under the
table at meals , in the schoolroom , and even , it is whispered , in
church . ) 

As for blithe Maid Margaret , she said nothing , for she was engaged in
testing the capacities of a green slope of turf for turning somersaults
upon . 

 " In Sir Walter Scott ' s time , " I resumed gravely ,  " novels were not
written for little girls-- " 

 " Then why did you give us Miss Edgeworth to read ? " said Sweetheart , 
quickly . But I went on without noticing the interruption ,  " Now , if you
like , I will tell you some of Sir Walter ' s stories over again , and then
I will mark in your own little edition the chapters you can read for
yourselves . " 

The last clause quieted the joyous shout which the promise of a
story--any sort of a story--had called forth . An uncertain look crept
over their faces , as if they scented afar off that abomination of
desolation-- " lessons in holiday time . " 

 " _Must_ we read the chapters ? " said Hugh John , unhopefully . 

 " Tell us the stories , anyway , and leave it to our honour ! " suggested Sir
Toady Lion , with a twinkle in his eye . 

 " Is it a story--oh , don ' t begin wifout me ! " Maid Margaret called from
behind the trees , her sturdy five-year-old legs carrying her to the
scene of action so fast that her hat fell off on the grass and she had
to turn back for it . 

 " Well , I will tell you , if I can , the story of  ' Waverley , ' " I said . 

 " Was he called after the pens ? " said Toady Lion the irreverent , but
under his breath . He was , however , promptly kicked into silence by his
peers--seriously this time , for he who interferes with the telling of a
story is a  " Whelk , " --which , for the moment , is the family word for
whatever is base , mean , unprofitable , and unworthy of being associated
with . 

But first I told them about the writing of _Waverley_ , and the hand at
the Edinburgh back window which wrote and wrote . Only that , but the
story as told by Lockhart had affected my imagination as a boy . 

 " Did you ever hear of the Unwearied Hand ? " I asked them . 

 " It sounds a nice title , " said Sir Toady;  " had he only one ? " 

 " It was in the early summer weather of 1814 , " I began ,  " after a dinner
in a house in George Street , that a young man , sitting at the wine with
his companions , looked out of the window , and , turning pale , asked his
next neighbour to change seats with him . 

 " ' There it is--at it again ! ' he said , with a thump of his fist on
thetable that made the decanters jump , and clattered the glasses;
 ' it has haunted me every night these three weeks . Just when I am
lifting my glass I look through the window , and there it is at
it--writing--writing--always writing ! ' 

 " So the young men , pressing about , looked eagerly , and lo ! seen through
the back window of a house in a street built at right angles , they saw
the shape of a man ' s hand writing swiftly , steadily , on large quarto
pages . As soon as one was finished , it was added to a pile which grew
and grew , rising , as it were , visibly before their eyes . 

 " ' It goes on like that all the time , even after the candles are lit , ' 
said the young man ,  ' and it makes me ashamed . I get no peace for it when
I am not at my books . Why cannot the man do his work without making
others uncomfortable ? ' 

 " Perhaps some of the company may have thought it was not a man at all , 
but some prisoned fairy tied to an endless task--Wizard Michael ' s
familiar spirit , or Lord Soulis ' s imp Red Cap doing his master ' s bidding
with a goose-quill . 

 " But it was something much more wonderful than any of these . It was the
hand of Walter Scott finishing _Waverley_ , at the rate of a volume every
ten days ! " 

 " Why did he work so hard ? " demanded Hugh John , whom the appearance of
fifty hands diligently writing would not have annoyed--no , not if they
had all worked like sewing-machines . 

 " Because , " I answered ,  " the man who wrote _Waverley_ was beginning to
have more need of money . He had bought land . He was involved in other
people ' s misfortunes . Besides , for a long time , he had been a great
poet , and now of late there had arisen a greater . " 

 " I know , " cried Sweetheart ,  " Lord Byron--but _I_ don ' t think he was . " 

 " Anyway Fitzjames and Roderick Dhu is ripping ! " announced Hugh John , 
and , rising to his feet , he whistled shrill in imitation of the outlaw . 
It was the time to take the affairs of children at the fulness of the
tide . 

 " I think , " I ventured ,  " that you would like the story of _Waverley_ if I
were to tell it now . I know you will like _Rob Roy_ . Which shall it be
first ? " 

Then there were counter-cries of  " Waverley " and  " Rob Roy " --all the fury
of a contested election . But Sweetheart , waiting till the brawlers were
somewhat breathed , indicated the final sense of the meeting by saying
quietly ,  " _Tell us the one the hand was writing ! _ " 





RED CAP TALES

TOLD FROM

WAVERLEY



