King Arthur , in the hall of his palace in London , walked quickly up and
down , thinking in great grief of the death of his queen . A group of
pages stood quietly in the shadow by the door , and two or three knights
gazed silently at the moody king . 

Suddenly there came the sound of running footsteps; a man dashed into
the hall , and threw himself at the feet of the king . It was a squire of
Sir Mordred ' s , and he craved leave to speak .  ' Say on , ' said the king . 

 ' My lord , ' said the man ,  ' Sir Lancelot hath rescued the queen from the
fire and hath slain some thirty of your knights , and he and his kin
have taken the queen among them away to some hiding-place . ' 

King Arthur stood for a little while dumb for pure sorrow; then , 
turning away , he wrung his hands and cried with a voice whose sadness
pierced every heart : 

 ' Alas , that ever I bare a crown , for now is the fairest fellowship of
knights that ever the world held , scattered and broken . ' 

 ' Further , my lord , ' went on the man , as others came into the hall ,  ' Sir
Lancelot hath slain the brethren of Sir Gawaine , and they are Sir
Gaheris and Sir Gareth . ' 

The king looked from the man to the knights that now surrounded him , as
if that which he heard was past all belief . 

 ' Is this truth ? ' he asked them , and all were moved at the sorrow on
his face and in his voice . 

 ' Yea , lord , ' said they . 

 ' Then , fair fellows , ' he said , very heavily ,  ' I charge you that no man
tell Sir Gawaine of the death of his two brothers; for I am sure that
when he heareth that his loved younger brother , Sir Gareth , is slain , 
he will nigh go out of his mind for sorrow and anger . ' 

The king strode up and down the chamber , wringing his hands in the
grief he could not utter . 

 ' Why , oh why , did he slay them ? ' he cried out at length .  ' He himself
knighted Sir Gareth when he went to fight the oppressor of the Lady
Lyones , and Sir Gareth loved him above all others . ' 

 ' That is truth , ' said some of the knights , and could not keep from
tears to see the king ' s grief ,  ' but they were slain in the hurtling
together of the knights , as Sir Lancelot dashed in the thick of the
press . He wist not whom he smote , so blind was his rage to get to the
queen at the stake . ' 

 ' Alas ! alas ! ' said the king .  ' The death of them will cause the
greatest woful war that ever was in this fair realm . I see ruin before
us all--rent and ruined shall we be , and all peace for ever at an end . ' 

Though the king had forbidden any of his knights to tell Sir Gawaine of
the death of his two brothers , Sir Mordred called his squire aside , and
bade him go and let Sir Gawaine know all that had happened . 

 ' Do you see to it , ' he told the man ,  ' that thou dost inflame his mind
against Sir Lancelot . ' 

The knave went to Sir Gawaine , and found him walking on the terrace of
the palace overlooking the broad quiet Thames , where the small trading
ships sailed up and down the river on their ways to and from Gaul and
the ports of the Kentish coast . 

 ' Sir , ' said the squire , doffing his cap and bowing ,  ' great and woful
deeds have been toward this day . The queen hath been rescued by Sir
Lancelot and his kin , and some thirty knights were slain in the melée
about the stake . ' 

 ' Heaven defend my brethren , ' said Sir Gawaine ,  ' for they went unarmed . 
But as for Sir Lancelot , I guessed he would try a rescue , and I had
deemed him no man of knightly worship if he had not . But , tell me , how
are my brethren . Where be they ? ' 

 ' Alas , sir , ' said the man ,  ' they be slain . ' 

The grim face of Sir Gawaine went pale , and with an iron hand he seized
the shoulder of the squire and shook him in his rage . 

 ' Have a care , thou limb of Mordred ' s , if thou speakest lies , ' he said . 
 ' I would not have them dead for all this realm and its riches . Where is
my young brother , Sir Gareth ? ' 

 ' Sir , I tell ye truth , ' said the man ,  ' for I know how heavy would be
your anger if I lied in this . Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris are slain , and
all good knights are mourning them , and in especial the king our
master . ' 

Sir Gawaine took a step backwards and his face went pale and then it
darkened with rage . 

 ' Tell me who slew them ? ' he thundered . 

 ' Sir , ' replied the man ,  ' Sir Lancelot slew them both . ' 

 ' False knave ! ' cried Sir Gawaine ,  ' I knew thou didst lie . ' 

He struck the man a great buffet on the head , so that he fell half
dazed to the ground . 

 ' Ha ! ha ! thou lying talebearer ! ' laughed Sir Gawaine , half relieved of
his fears , yet still half doubtful .  ' To tell me that Sir Lancelot slew
them ! Why , man , knowest thou of whom thou pratest ? Sir Lancelot to slay
my dear young brother Gareth ! Why , man , Gareth loved Sir Lancelot as he
loved me--not more than he loved me , but near as much; and Sir Lancelot
was ever proud of him .  ' Twas he that knighted my young brother Gareth , 
brave and hearty , noble of mind and goodly of look ! He would have stood
with Lancelot against the king himself , so greatly he loved him . And
thou--thou foul-mouth ! --thou tellest me that Lancelot hath slain him ! 
Begone from my sight , thou split-tongue ! ' 

 ' Nevertheless , Sir Gawaine , ' said the man , rising ,  ' Sir Lancelot slew
them both in his rage . As he would--saving your presence--have slain
you had you stood between him and the queen at the stake . ' 

At these words , stubbornly spoken in spite of the furious looks of Sir
Gawaine , the knight realised that the man was speaking the truth . 

His look was fixed on the face of the knave , and rage and grief filled
his eyes as he grasped the fact that his beloved brother was really
slain . Then the blood surged into his face , and he dashed away . 

Men started to see the wild figure of Sir Gawaine rushing through the
passages , his eyes bloodshot , his face white . At length he dashed into
the presence of the king . Arthur stood sorrowing amidst his knights , 
but Sir Gawaine rushed through them and faced the king . 

 ' Ha ! King Arthur ! ' he cried , half breathless , but in a great wild
voice ,  ' my good brother , Sir Gareth , is slain , and also Sir Gaheris ! I
cannot bear the thought of them slain . It cannot be true ! I cannot
believe it ! ' 

 ' Nay , nor can any think upon it , ' said the king ,  ' and keep from
weeping . ' 

 ' Ay , ay , ' said Sir Gawaine in a terrible voice ,  ' there shall be
weeping , I trow , and that erelong . Sir , I will go see my dead brothers . 
I would kiss them ere they be laid in earth . ' 

 ' Nay , that may not be , ' said the king gently .  ' I knew how great would
be thy sorrow , and that sight of them would drive thee mad . And I have
caused them to be interred instantly . ' 

 ' Tell me , ' said Gawaine , and men marvelled to see the wild look in his
eyes and to hear the fierce voice ,  ' is it truth that Sir Lancelot slew
them both ? ' 

 ' It is thus told me , ' said the King ,  ' that in his fury Sir Lancelot
knew not whom he smote . ' 

 ' But , man , ' thundered Sir Gawaine ,  ' they bare no arms against him ! 
Their hearts were with him , and young Gareth loved him as if--as if
Lancelot was his own brother . ' 

 ' I know it , I know it , ' replied King Arthur .  ' But men say they were
mingled in the thick press of the fight , and Lancelot knew not friend
from foe , but struck down all that stood between him and the queen . ' 

For a space Sir Gawaine was silent , and men looked upon him with awe
and compassion . His mane of hair , grizzled and wild , was thrown back
upon his shoulders , and his eyes flamed with a glowing light as of
fire . Suddenly he stepped up to the king , and lifting his right hand
said , in a voice that trembled With rage : 

 ' My lord , my king , and mine uncle , wit you well that now I make oath by
my knighthood , that from this day I will seek Sir Lancelot and never
rest till he be slain or he slay me . Therefore , my lord king , and you , 
my fellow knights and lords , I require you all to prepare yourselves
for war; for , know you , though I ravage this land and all the lands of
Christendom , I will not rest me nor slake my revenge until I come up to
Lancelot and drive my sword into his evil heart . ' 

With that Sir Gawaine strode from the room , and for a space all men
were silent , so fierce and full of hatred had been his words . 

 ' I see well , ' said the king ,  ' that the death of these twain knights
will cause the deadliest war that hath ever raged , and never shall we
have rest until Gawaine do slay Lancelot or is slain by him . O
Lancelot ! Lancelot ! my peerless knight , that ever thou shouldst be the
cause of the ruin of this my fair kingdom ! ' 

None that heard the king could keep from tears; and many felt that in
this quarrel the king ' s heart was not set , except for the sake of Sir
Gawaine , his nephew , and all his kin . 

Then there were made great preparations in London and all the lands
south of Trent , with sharpening of swords and spears , making of harness
and beating of smiths ' hammers on anvils . 

Men ' s minds were in sore distress , and the faces of the citizens were
long and white with dismay . Daily the quarrel caused other quarrels . 
Many a group of knights came to high words , some taking the side of
Lancelot and the queen , and others that of the king and Sir Gawaine . 
Often they came to blows , and one or other of their number would be
left writhing and groaning on the ground . 

Families broke up in bad blood by reason of it , for the sons would avow
their intent to go and enlist with Lancelot , while the fathers , in high
anger at such disloyalty to Arthur , would send their tall sons away , 
bidding them never to look upon their faces again . 

Women sorrowed and wept , for whichever side they took , it meant that
one or other of their dear ones was opposed to them , and would go to
battle , fighting against those of their own kin and of their own
hearths . 

Towards midsummer the host was ready , and took the road to the north . 
The quarrel had been noised abroad throughout Britain , and many kings , 
dukes and barons came to the help of Arthur , so that his army was a
great multitude . Yet many others had gone to Lancelot , where he lay in
his castle of Joyous Gard , not far from Carlisle . 

Thither , in the month of July , when the husbandmen were looking to
their ripening fields and thinking of harvest , King Arthur and Sir
Gawaine drew with their army and laid a siege against the castle of
Joyous Gard , and against the walled town which it protected . But for
all their engines of war , catapults which threw great stones , and
ramming irons which battered the walls , they could not make a way into
the place , and so lay about it until harvest time . 

One day , as Queen Gwenevere stood at a window of the castle , she looked
down at the tents of the besieging host , and her gaze lingered on the
purple tent of King Arthur , with the banner of the red dragon on the
pole above it . As she looked , she saw her husband issue from the tent
and begin to walk up and down alone in a place apart . Very moody did he
seem , as he strode to and fro with bent head . Sometimes he looked
towards Joyous Gard , and then his face had a sad expression upon it
which went to the queen ' s heart . 

She went to Sir Lancelot , and said : 

 ' Sir Lancelot , I would that this dreadful war were done , and that thou
wert again friends and in peace with my dear lord . Something tells me
that he sorrows to be at enmity with thee . Thou wert his most famous
knight and brought most worship to the fellowship of the Round Table . 
Wilt thou not try to speak to my lord ? Tell him how evil were the false
reports of the conspiracy against him , and that we are innocent of any
treason against him and this dear land . ' 

 ' Lady , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' on my knighthood I will try to accord with
my lord . If our enemies have not quite poisoned his thoughts of us , he
may listen and believe . ' 

Thereupon Sir Lancelot caused his trumpeter to sound from the walls , 
and ask that King Arthur would hold a parley with him . This was done , 
and Sir Pentred , a knight of King Arthur ' s , took the message to the
king . 

In a little while King Arthur , with Sir Gawaine and a company of his
counsellors and knights , came beneath the walls , and the trumpeters
blew a truce , and the bowmen ceased from letting fly their arrows and
the men-at-arms from throwing spears . 

Then Sir Lancelot came down to a narrow window in the gate-tower , and
cried out to the king : 

 ' Most noble king , I think that neither of us may get honour from this
war . Cannot we make an end of it ? ' 

 ' Ay , ' cried Sir Gawaine , his face red with anger , and shaking his
mailed fist at Lancelot ,  ' come thou forth , thou traitor , and we will
make an end of thee . ' 

 ' Come forth , ' said the king ,  ' and I will meet thee on the field . Thou
hast slain thirty of my good knights , taken my queen from me , and
plunged this realm in ruin . ' 

 ' Nay , lord , it was not I that caused this war , ' said Sir Lancelot .  ' I
had been but a base knight to have suffered the noble lady my queen to
be burned at the stake . And it passes me , my lord king , how thou
couldst ever think to suffer her to be burned . ' 

 ' She was charged with poisoning a knight who slandered her , ' said the
king .  ' I must see justice done on high and low , and though it grieved
me to condemn her , I could do naught else . Moreover , if Sir Pinel spoke
true , both you and she were conspiring to slay me and to rule this
kingdom in my stead . ' 

 ' A foul lie , a black calumny ! ' cried Sir Lancelot fiercely .  ' And I
would answer for it with the strength which God might give me on any
six of your knights that may say I am so black a traitor . I tell you , 
my lord king , and I swear it on my knighthood , and may death strike me
now if I lie , that neither I nor the queen have ever had evil thoughts
against your person , nor had designs upon your crown . ' 

At so solemn an oath men stood still and waited , for few doubted in
those days that if a man who took so great an oath was speaking
falsely , fire from heaven would instantly descend and consume him . 

The moments passed and nothing happened , and men breathed again . 

Sir Lancelot looked at the face of King Arthur , and saw by the light
upon it that the king believed him; and Sir Lancelot rejoiced in his
heart . 

He saw the king turn to Sir Gawaine with a questioning air , as if he
would ask what more his nephew wanted . But next moment , with a harsh
laugh , Sir Gawaine spoke . 

 ' Hark ye , Sir Lancelot , thou mayest swear to Heaven as to some things , 
and there are those that may be moved by thy round oaths . But this I
charge upon thee , thou false , proud knight , that thou didst slay two
unarmed men--men that loved thee and worshipped thee ! Forsooth , thou
boastful braggart and mouthing hero , thou wilt not dare to deny it ! ' 

Sad was the face and voice of Sir Lancelot as he made reply . 

 ' I cannot hope to find excuse from you , ' he said ,  ' for I cannot and
never will forgive myself . I would as lief have slain my nephew , Sir
Bors , as slay young Sir Gareth whom I loved , and Gaheris his brother . 
Sorrow is on me for that ! I was mad in my rage and did not see them . 
Only I knew that many knights stood between me and the queen , and I
slew all that seemed to bar my passage . ' 

 ' Thou liest , false , recreant knight ! ' cried Sir Gawaine , whose grief by
now had made him mad with the lust for revenge;  ' thou slewest them in
thy pride , to despite me and the king , because we had permitted the
queen to go to the stake . Thou coward and traitor ! Therefore , wit thee
well , Sir Lancelot , I will not quit this quest until I feel my sword
thrusting into thy evil heart . ' 

 ' Sorrow is on me , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' to know that thou dost so
hatefully pursue me . If thou didst not , I think my lord the king would
give me his good grace again , and receive back his queen and believe us
innocent . ' 

 ' I believe it well , false , recreant knight ! ' cried Sir Gawaine , full of
rage to know that the king verily wished to have peace;  ' but know ye
that while I live , my good uncle will make war upon thee , and at last
we will have thee in spite of thy castle walls and thy skill in battle . 
And then I will have thy head . ' 

 ' I trust ye for that , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' for I see that thy hatred
hath crazed thee . So , if ye may get me , I shall expect no mercy . ' 

Then , seeing how useless it was to keep up the parley any longer , Sir
Lancelot withdrew . Next day spies brought in word to Sir Lancelot that , 
at a council of his chief men , the king had said he would take back his
queen and make peace with Sir Lancelot; but that Sir Gawaine had
fiercely told him that if he did not keep up the war until Sir Lancelot
was taken or slain , he and all the kin of Lot would break away from the
realm and their allegiance . Indeed , it was rumoured that Sir Gawaine
would have made the king prisoner had he not yielded; and so powerful
was Sir Gawaine and the lords that followed him , that none could have
been strong enough to withstand them . 

Sir Gawaine , yearning , by reason of his hatred , to get Sir Lancelot out
of his castle to fight with him , now sent knights to cry out shame upon
him under his walls . Thus they marched up and down , calling out
insulting names and charging him with dishonourable deeds . 

Until at length the very men-at-arms that kept watch upon Sir
Lancelot ' s walls reddened for shame , and hurled down spears and stones
at the foul mouths . Sir Bors , Sir Ector de Maris and Sir Lionel , they
also heard the words , and going to the other knights of Sir Lancelot , 
took counsel with them , and decided that this could no longer be
suffered . 

Together they went to Sir Lancelot and said to him : 

 ' Wit ye well , my lord , that we feel great scorn of the evil words which
Sir Gawaine spoke unto you when that ye parleyed with him , and also of
these shameful names which men call upon ye for all the citizens to
hear . Wherefore , we charge you and beseech you , if ye will to keep our
service , hold us no longer behind these walls , but let us out , in the
name of Heaven and your fair name , and have at these rascals . ' 

 ' Fair friends , ' replied Sir Lancelot ,  ' I am full loth to fight against
my dear lord , King Arthur . ' 

 ' But if ye will not , ' said Sir Lionel , his brother ,  ' all men will say
ye fear to stir from these walls , and hearing the shameful words they
cry , will say that there must be truth in them if ye seek not to
silence them . ' 

They spoke long with Sir Lancelot , and at length he was persuaded; and
he sent a message to the king telling him that he would come out and do
battle; but that , for the love he bore the king , he prayed he would not
expose his person in the fight . 

But Sir Gawaine returned answer that this was the king ' s quarrel , and
that the king would fight against a traitor knight with all his power . 

On the morrow , at nine in the morning , King Arthur drew forth his host , 
and Sir Lancelot brought forth his array . When they stood facing each
other , Sir Lancelot addressed his men and charged all his knights to
save King Arthur from death or wounds , and for the sake of their old
friendship with Sir Gawaine , to avoid battle with him also . 

Then , with a great hurtling and crashing , the knights ran together , and
much people were there slain . The knights of Sir Lancelot did great
damage among the king ' s people , for they were fierce knights , and
burned to revenge themselves for the evil names they had heard . 

Sir Gawaine raged like a lion through the field , seeking Sir Lancelot , 
and many knights did he slay or overthrow . Once , indeed , King Arthur , 
dashing through the fight , came upon Sir Lancelot . 

 ' Now , Sir Lancelot , ' he cried ,  ' defend thee , for thou art the causer of
this civil war . ' 

At these words he struck at Sir Lancelot with his sword; but Sir
Lancelot took no means to defend himself , and put down his own sword
and shield , as if he could not put up arms against his king . At this
the king was abashed and put down his sword , and looked sorrowfully
upon Sir Lancelot . 

Then the surging tide of battle poured between them and separated them , 
until it happened that Sir Bors saw King Arthur at a little distance . 
With a spear the knight rushed at the king , and so fierce was his
stroke and hardy his blow that the king was stricken to the ground . 

Whereupon Sir Bors leapt from his horse and drew his sword and ran
towards the king . But some one called upon him , and looking up he saw
Sir Lancelot riding swiftly towards him . 

Sir Bors held the king down upon the ground by the nose-piece of his
helm , and in his other hand he held his naked sword . 

Looking up to Sir Lancelot , he cried in a fierce voice : 

 ' Cousin , shall I make an end of this war ?  ' Twere easy done . ' 

He meant that , if the king were slain , Sir Gawaine would lose half his
forces , and could not hope to keep up the war against Sir Lancelot
singlehanded . 

 ' Nay , nay , ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' on peril of thy head touch not the
king . Let him rise , man . I will not see that most noble king , who made
me knight and once loved me , either slain or shamed . ' 

Sir Lancelot , leaping from his horse , went and raised the king , and
held the stirrup of his horse while the king mounted again . 

 ' My lord Arthur , ' said Lancelot , looking up at the king ,  ' I would in
the name of Heaven that ye cause this war to cease , for none of us
shall get honour by it . And though I forbear to strike you and I try to
avoid my former brothers and friends of the Round Table , they do
continually seek to slay me and will not avoid me . ' 

King Arthur looked upon Lancelot , and thought how nobly courteous was
he more than any other knight . The tears burst from the king ' s eyes and
he could not speak , and sorrowfully he rode away and would fight no
more , but commanded the trumpets to cease battle . Whereupon Sir
Lancelot also drew off his forces , and the dead were buried and the
wounded were tended . 

Next morning the battle was joined again . Very fiercely fought the
king ' s party , for Sir Gawaine had commanded that no quarter should be
given , and that whoever slew a knight of Sir Lancelot ' s should have his
helm filled with gold . Sir Gawaine himself raged like a lion about the
field , his spear in rest . He sought for Sir Lancelot; but that knight
always avoided him , and great was Gawaine ' s rage and scorn . 

At length Sir Bors saw Sir Gawaine from afar , and spurred across the
field towards him . 

 ' Ha ! Sir Bors , ' cried the other mockingly ,  ' if ye will find that
cowardly cousin of thine , and bring him here to face me , I will love
thee . ' 

 ' ' Twere well I should not take thy words seriously , ' mocked Sir Bors in
his turn .  ' For if I were to bring him to thee , thou wouldst sure repent
it . Never yet hath he failed to give thee thy fall , for all thy pride
and fierceness . ' 

This was truth . Often in the jousting of earlier days , when Sir
Lancelot had come in disguise and had been compelled to fight Sir
Gawaine , the latter had had the worst . But Sir Lancelot , loving his old
brother-in-arms as he did , had in later years avoided the assault with
Sir Gawaine; yet the greater prowess and skill of Sir Lancelot were
doubted by none . 

Sir Gawaine raged greatly at the words of Sir Bors , for he knew they
were true , though he had wished they were not . 

 ' Thy vaunting of thy recreant kinsman ' s might will not avail thee , ' he
cried furiously .  ' Defend thyself ! ' 

 ' I came to have to do with thee , ' replied Sir Bors fiercely .  ' Yesterday
thou didst slay my cousin Lionel . To-day , if God wills it , thou thyself
shall have a fall . ' 

Then they set spurs to their horses and met together so furiously that
the lance of either bore a great hole in the other ' s armour , and both
were borne backwards off their horses , sorely wounded . Their friends
came and took them up and tended them , but for many days neither of the
knights could move from their beds . 

When the knights of Sir Lancelot saw that Sir Bors was grievously
wounded , they were wroth with their leader . Going to him , they charged
him with injuring his own cause . 

 ' You will not exert yourself to slay these braggart foes of yours , ' 
they said to him .  ' What does it profit us that you avoid slaying
knights because , though they are now your bitter foes , they were once
brothers of the Round Table ? Do they avoid ye , and seek not to slay you
and us your kindred and friends ? Sir Lionel is dead , and he is your
brother; and Sir Galk , Sir Griffith , Sir Saffre and Sir Conan--all good
and mighty knights--are wounded sorely . Ye were ever courteous and
kindly , Sir Lancelot , ' they ended ,  ' but have a care lest now your
courtesy ruin not your cause and us . ' 

Seeing by these words that he was like to chill the hearts of his
friends if he continued to avoid slaying his enemies , Sir Lancelot
sorrowfully promised that henceforth he would not stay his hand . After
that he avoided none that came against him , though for very sorrow he
could have wept when some knight , with whom in happier times he had
drunk wine and jested at the board in Camelot , rushed at him with
shrewd strokes to slay him . 

As the fight went on , the lust of battle grew in Sir Lancelot ' s heart , 
and manfully he fought , and with all his strength and skill he lay
about him . By the time of evensong his party stood very well , and the
king ' s side seemed dispirited and as if they would avoid the fierce
rushes with which Sir Lancelot ' s knights attacked them . 

Staying his horse , Sir Lancelot looked over the field , and sorrowed to
see how many dead there were--dead of whom many may have been slain by
their own kindred . He saw how the horses of his knights were splashed
with the blood that lay in pools here and there , and grief was heavy
upon him . 

Sir Palom , a very valiant knight , came up to him . 

 ' See , lord , ' he cried ,  ' how our foes flinch from the fierce hurtling of
our knights . They are dispirited by the wounding of Sir Gawaine . Sir
Kay is also wounded , and Sir Torre is slain . Now , if ye will take my
advice , this day should cease this war once for all . Do ye gather all
your forces , lord , and I think with one great dash together ye should
scatter their wavering knights , and this field would be won . ' 

 ' Alas ! ' said Sir Lancelot ,  ' I would not have it so . It cuts me to my
heart to war as I do against my lord Arthur , and to trample him and his
people in the mire of defeat--nay , I should suffer remorse till my last
day . ' 

 ' My lord , ' said Sir Palom ,  ' I think ye are unwise . Ye spare them thus
to come again against ye . They will give ye no thanks , and if they
could get you and yours at so great a disadvantage , wit you well they
would not spare you . ' 

But Sir Lancelot would not be moved , and in pity he ordered the
trumpeters to sound the retreat . King Arthur did likewise , and each
party retired in the twilight from the field , where the wounded lay
groaning till death or succour came; and the dead lay still and pale , 
until the kindly earth was thrown over them . 

Some weeks passed in which the armies did not meet; for the host of
King Arthur was not now so proud as they had been , seeing that they had
lost many good knights; and Sir Lancelot would not of his own will
sally out from his castle to fall upon the king . 

But ever Sir Gawaine tried to inflame the mind of King Arthur and his
kinsmen against Sir Lancelot , and he advised them to join battle with
their enemy . Moreover , from the lands of his kingdom of Lothian , of
which Sir Gawaine was now king in the place of his dead father , King
Lot , a great body of young knights and men-at-arms came; and the king ' s
party began to recover their courage . 

Many began daily to ride to the walls of Joyous Gard , and by insult and
evil names endeavoured to tempt forth the men of Sir Lancelot . Soon the
young knights clamoured to King Arthur and Sir Gawaine to permit them
to attack the walls , and reluctantly the king consented to call his
council for next day to devise some means of breaking down the castle . 

Headstrong was the counsel given by the young knights at that meeting , 
and greatly did King Arthur sorrow to feel that , for love of his
nephew , Sir Gawaine , he would be compelled to yield to their wild
demands for further battle . 

Suddenly the door of the hall where sate the council was opened , and
the porter of the gate appeared and approached the king . 

 ' My lord , ' he said ,  ' the holy Bishop of London and King Geraint of
Devon crave audience of you . ' 

Some of the fierce young knights scowled at the names and uttered cries
of disgust . 

The king ' s face brightened , and before any could advise him against his
will , he said : 

 ' Bid them enter instantly . ' 

 ' The meddling priest and the petty king that knoweth not his mind ! ' 
sneered Sir Gawaine , looking fiercely about the room .  ' I pray thee , 
uncle , ' he said to the king ,  ' listen not to their womanish persuasions , 
if thou lovest me . ' 

King Arthur did not answer , but looked towards the door impatiently . 

Through this there came first three priests and three armed men , and
behind them stepped an old and reverend man , the hair beside his
tonsure white as driven snow , and falling over his white robe edged
with red , that showed his rank as bishop . Then , towering above him , a
noble knightly figure , came Geraint of Devon , grown nobler still since
those noble days when he had proved himself to be a strong leader
indeed , while men had thought him soft and foolish . 

All rose to their feet in reverence to the bishop , and fondly did King
Arthur welcome Geraint , for this wise knight had from the first opposed
Sir Gawaine in this war , and had refused to fight against Sir Lancelot
and the queen , though he abated not his service to the king . 

Dark was the look which Gawaine darted at Geraint , but quiet yet
fearless was Geraint ' s answering gaze . 

 ' What ye have to say , ' said Gawaine angrily ,  ' say it quickly and
begone . If ye are still of two minds , there seems no need to speak , and
there is no need to bring a bishop to your aid . ' 

 ' Gawaine , ' said King Geraint , and his voice was quiet , yet with a ring
of menace in it ,  ' I think grief hath made you a little mad . Let the
bishop speak , I pray ye . He hath a message for the king . ' 

 ' My lord , ' said the bishop ,  ' I come from his Holiness the Pope . ' 

At these words Sir Gawaine started forward , his hand upon his sword , as
if he would willingly in his madness slay the holy priest . 

 ' And , ' went on the bishop , his grave voice and his quiet look not
bating for all the wrathful fire in Sir Gawaine ' s eyes ,  ' I bear with me
the bull of his Holiness--see , here it is--by which his Highness doth
charge King Arthur of Britain , as he is a Christian king , to take back
Queen Gwenevere unto his love and worship , and to make peace with Sir
Lancelot . ' 

The murmurs of the wild young knights rose in a sudden storm , while Sir
Gawaine glared with looks of hatred at King Geraint and the bishop . 

 ' And if ye do not this command , ' rang out the voice of the bishop  ( and
there was sorrow in its tone , and silence sank on all ) ,  ' if ye do not , 
then will his Holiness excommunicate this land . None of ye here have
seen so terrible a thing as a land laid under the interdict of the Holy
Church , and rarely doth she find her children so stubbornly evil as to
merit it . But the Father of the Church , seeing how this land is torn
and rent by this bitter war between brothers , and fearful lest , while
ye tear at each others ' lives , the fierce and evil pagan will gain upon
ye and beat the lives from both of ye , and possess this fair island and
drive Christ and His religion from it utterly--seeing all this , his
Holiness would pronounce the doom if ye are too stiffnecked to obey
him . Then will ye see this land lie as if a curse were upon it . Your
churches will be shut , and the relics of the holy saints will be laid
in ashes , the priests will not give prayers nor the Church its holy
offices; and the dead shall lie uncoffined , for no prayers may be said
over them . Say , then , King Arthur of Britain , what shall be the answer
to the command of his Holiness which here I lay before thee . ' 

With these words the bishop held a parchment rolled out between his
hands before the eyes of the king . Men craned forward and saw the black
writing on the white skin , and the great seals , or bulls , hanging from
it whereon those who could read saw the device of the Pope of Rome . 

 ' Say , is this thy doing ? ' cried Sir Gawaine fiercely , looking at King
Geraint .  ' Didst thou send this meddling priest to Rome to get this ? ' 

 ' That did I , ' replied Geraint . 

 ' Then now I make this vow , ' thundered Sir Gawaine ,  ' that though thou
hast balked me of my vengeance now , I will mark thee , thou king of two
minds , and be thou sure that erelong I will avenge me of this
treachery , and that upon thy body and in thy blood . ' 

 ' I mark thy words , Sir Gawaine , ' said Geraint , whose eyes flashed
fiercely , though his voice was calm ,  ' and I say again thou art mad . I
will tell thee and the king , our lord and master , why I did advise the
holy bishop to go to Rome and get the Pope ' s command . First , as ye all
know , I did think this war a wicked one beyond all measure , and ever
have I raised my voice against it . And what I foresaw has come to pass . 
As the good priest saith , while ye tore at each other ' s throats here in
the furthest marches of the north , the sly , fierce pagan , learning how
all the land was rent and weakened by this evil war , has crept up in
his longships , he has landed at many solitary places on the coast , and
has spread far and wide throughout the land , burning and slaughtering . 
The long files of his captives , our kinsmen , go day by day , even as ye
fight here , brother with brother , down to the black ships , and ye do
naught to save them or avenge them . Already have I , in my office as
Count of the Saxon Shore , battered them back to their ships at Lemanis , 
Llongporth and Rutupiæ; but here in the north , for all that the old
lion , Uriens of Reged , worn with war and full of age , hath taken the
field against them , here , behind your backs as ye battle , kin with kin , 
a great and a stubborn pagan , whom men call Hyring the Land-waster , 
hath entered the land and still prevails . Crafty he is and strong , for
he hath made treaties with some of our weaker kin , and their women he
hath taken in marriage for his leaders , and thus in our very midst
there is treachery , hand-in-hand with the brutal invaders . Yet still
you , Gawaine , are so mad , so lost to all care for your nation ' s weal , 
that you would see your people ruined and your land possessed by the
savage boars of Saxons , while ye slake your vengeance for a private
wrong . If still you so would do , I call you traitor , and , by the grace
of God , I will make good my words upon your body , when we have thrust
the pagan from the land and peace is within our borders once again . ' 

While the thunder of his noble anger still rolled through the wide
hall , King Arthur arose , and men marked the resolution in his eyes . 

 ' I will that there be no more war , ' he said , and he looked sternly at
Gawaine .  ' Geraint hath spoken the truth , and the truth shall prevail . I
repent me that I have so long forgotten the needs of my kingdom . Do
thou now , good bishop , go to Sir Lancelot , tell him that I will make
peace with him and that I will receive back my queen . And do thou , good
Geraint , fare south again . I thank thee from my heart for what thou
hast done . Would to Heaven that all my knights were as clean-souled and
as single-minded in devotion unto me as thou art . Do thou go and fulfil
thy great office . Watch thou the coasts as hitherto thou hast watched
them; and soon I will follow to aid thee , should the foul and savage
pagans strive again to break into my realm . ' 

But , after all , Sir Gawaine had his way in part . The bishop took the
king ' s assurance , sealed with his great seal , whereby he promised Sir
Lancelot that he should come and go safe from murder or sudden onset , 
and desiring him to bring the queen to the king at his hall at
Carlisle . But in that parchment was no word of reconciliation with Sir
Lancelot . Sir Gawaine fiercely told the king that the day on which he , 
the king , should clasp the hand of Lancelot in friendship , he , Sir
Gawaine , with all his vassals and his men , would leave the kingdom . So
deep and burning was the hatred which Gawaine bore Sir Lancelot that he
even threatened that , if his will was not granted , he would join the
pagans and fight against the king . 

So shamed and saddened was the king at these words that , to put an end
to his nephew ' s rage , he consented to do as he desired . Therefore , 
though the bishop strove to persuade the king to make his peace with
Sir Lancelot , Sir Gawaine ' s will was done , and the bishop went sadly to
Joyous Gard . 

He showed his writings to Sir Lancelot and the queen , and both were
sorrowful in that no word of reconciliation was said . 

 ' I will do my lord ' s desire , ' said the knight ,  ' but I see that Sir
Gawaine ' s hatred of me is in no way abated . Nevertheless , do thou ride , 
my lord bishop , to the king . Commend me unto his good grace , and say to
him that in five days I will myself bring my lady , Queen Gwenevere , 
unto him as he doth desire . ' 

On the day appointed , as the king sat in hall at Carlisle , surrounded
by his knights and their ladies , with Sir Gawaine standing on the high
seat beside him , there came the beat of many hoofs , and into the town
rode Sir Lancelot with the queen , knights and squires accompanying
them . They reined up at the wide door of the hall , and Sir Lancelot
alighted , and having helped the queen to dismount , he took her hand , 
and led her through the ranks of knights and ladies to where sat King
Arthur . 

Sir Lancelot kneeled upon the edge of the dais , and the queen with him;
and to see so noble a knight and so beautiful a lady , sad of
countenance as they were , forced many a tear to the eyes of the knights
and dames who looked on . Then , rising , and taking up the queen , Sir
Lancelot spoke : 

 ' My most redoubted lord , ' he said ,  ' you shall understand that by the
pope ' s commandment and yours I have brought unto you my lady your
queen , as right requireth; and if there be any knight here , of any
degree , who shall say that she or I have ever thought to plot treason
against your person or your crown , or the peace of this realm , then do
I say here and now that I , Lancelot du Lake , will make it good upon his
body , that he lies . And , my gracious lord , if this is all that there is
between you , my king , and myself , there need be naught of ill thought
between us , but only peace and goodwill . But I wist well that one that
hates me will not suffer ye to do what is in your good and kingly
heart . ' 

Sternly did Sir Lancelot look at Sir Gawaine , while the tears gushed
from King Arthur ' s eyes , and from the eyes of many that heard Sir
Lancelot ' s sad words . 

Fierce and dark was the look which Sir Gawaine returned to Sir
Lancelot . 

 ' The king may do as he will , ' he said harshly and in a loud voice ,  ' but
wit thou well , Sir Lancelot , thou and I shall never be at peace till
one of us be slain; for thou didst slay my twain brothers , though they
bore no harness against thee nor any ill will . Yet traitorously thou
didst slay them ! ' 

 ' Alas , my lord , ' said Sir Lancelot , and the tears bedewed his face ,  ' I
cannot ask you for your forgiveness for that deed , unwitting though it
was done and in my madness . Would to Heaven they had worn harness ! Wit
you well that ever will I bewail the death of my dear friend , Sir
Gareth .  ' Twas I that made him knight , and ever did I delight to see
him , to hear his manly laugh ring out , and to see the light in his
brave eyes that never suffered a mean or evil action . I wot he loved me
above all other knights , and there was none of my kinsmen that I loved
so much as I loved him . Ever will the sorrow of the death of thy
brethren lie upon my soul; and to make some small amends I will , if my
lord will suffer it and it will please you , Sir Gawaine , I will walk in
my shirt and barefoot from Lemanis even unto this town , and at every
ten miles I will found a holy house , and endow it with monks to pray
for the souls of Sir Gareth and Sir Gaheris . Surely , Sir Gawaine , that
will do more good unto their souls than that my most noble lord and you
should war on me . ' 

Every cheek was wet and the tears of the king fell from his eyes , yet
made he no effort to restrain or hide them . 

 ' Out upon such monkish deeds ! ' cried Sir Gawaine , and his scornful eyes
surveyed the weeping knights and dames .  ' Know thee , once for all , that
never shalt thou wipe away the treacherous murder of my brothers but by
thy blood . Ye are safe now for a season , for the pope hath given you
safety , but in this land--whatever comes of it I care not--thou shalt
not abide above fifteen days , or else I shall have thy head . So make ye
no more ado; but deliver the queen from thee , and get thee quickly out
of this court and out of this realm . ' 

 ' Well , ' said Sir Lancelot , and laughed grimly ,  ' if I had known I should
have so short an answer to my proffers of peace , I had thought twice
ere I had come hither . But now , madam , ' he said , turning to the weeping
queen beside him ,  ' I must say farewell to ye , for now do I depart from
this noble fellowship and this dear realm for ever . Pray for me , and
send me word if any lying tongues speak evil of you , and if any
knight ' s hand may deliver you by battle , believe me mine shall so
deliver you . ' 

With these words Sir Lancelot bent and kissed the queen ' s hand , and so
turned away and departed . There was neither king , baron , knight nor
squire of all that great company who did not weep , nor think that Sir
Gawaine had been of most evil mind to refuse the noble proffers of Sir
Lancelot . 

Heavy was King Arthur ever thereafter , and never might man see his face
brighten nor hear his laugh; and the better of his knights sorrowed
with him , and knew what was in his heart . 

 ' In this realm will be no more quiet , ' said Sir Owen of the Fountain to
his fellows as they stood upon the walls of Carlisle and saw the band
of Sir Lancelot riding southwards , the sunlight flashing from their
helms and armour .  ' The pagans have gathered strength daily while we
have fought with each other , and that which would have given us the
strength and the union which would hurl them from our coasts is
shattered and broken . By the noble fellowship of the Round Table was
King Arthur and his realm borne up , and by their nobleness the king and
all his realm was in quietness and in peace . And a great part , ' he
ended ,  ' was because of the noble nature of Sir Lancelot , whom Sir
Gawaine ' s mad rage hath driven from the kingdom . Nor is all the evil
ended yet . ' 


