I . WITCHCRAFT AND WIZARDRY

THROUGH storm and darkness a young Oxford scholar came to the New Place
of Ellangowan . He had been again and again refused shelter along the
road for himself and his tired horse , but at last he found himself
welcomed by Godfrey Bertram , the Laird of Ellangowan , attended by
Dominie Sampson , his faithful companion , the village schoolmaster , on
the threshold of the great house . 

That very night an heir was born to the line of the Bertrams of
Ellangowan , one of the most ancient in Galloway , and as usual the New
Place was full of company come from far and near to make merry over the
event . Godfrey himself , a soft , good-natured , pliable man , welcomed
Mannering  ( for that was the name of the young Oxford student ) , and set
him forthwith to calculating the horoscope of the babe from the stars . 
This , Mannering , to whom astrology seemed no better than child ' s play , 
was at first unwilling to do , until the awkward opposition of Dominie
Sampson , as well as some curiosity to see if he could remember the terms
of the sham-science learned in youth , caused him to consent to make the
calculation . 

He was still further pushed on by the appearance of a wild gipsy woman , 
a sort of queen among the ragged wandering tribe which camped in a
little hamlet on the Laird ' s estates . She entered the house singing
shrilly a kind of ancient spell : 

  " Trefoil , vervain , John ' s wort , dill , 
 Hinder witches of their will ! 
 Weel is them , that weel may
 Fast upon Saint Andrew ' s day . 
 Saint Bride and her brat , 
 Saint Colme and his cat , 
 Saint Michael and his spear
 Keep the house frae reif and weir . " 

So sang Meg Merrilies , the gipsy , a great cudgel in her hand , and her
dress and bearing more like those of a man than of a woman . Elf-locks
shot up through the holes in her bonnet , and her black eyes rolled with
a kind of madness . Soon , however , Godfrey , who evidently only half
disbelieved in her powers as a witch , dismissed her to the kitchen with
fair words , while Guy Mannering , whom his strange adventure had rendered
sleepless , walked forth into the night . The vast ruins of the ancient
castle of the Bertrams rose high and silent on the cliffs above him , but
beneath , in the little sandy cove , lights were still moving briskly , 
though it was the dead hour of the night . A smuggler brig was disloading
a cargo of brandy , rum , and silks , most likely , brought from the Isle of
Man . 

At sight of his figure moving on the cliffs above , a voice on the shore
sang out ,  " Ware hawk ! Douse the glim ! " And in a moment all was darkness
beneath him . 

When Mannering returned to his chamber in the dim light of the morning , 
he proceeded to carry out his calculations according to the strictest
rules of astrology , marking carefully the hour of the birth of the babe . 
He found that young Harry Bertram , for so it had been decided to name
the child , was threatened with danger in his _fifth_ , his _tenth_ , and
his _twenty-first_ years . 

More dissatisfied than he cared to own with these results , Mannering
walked out again to view the ruins of the old castle of Ellangowan in
the morning light . They were , he now saw , of vast extent and much
battered on the side toward the sea--so much so , indeed , that he could
observe through a gap in the mason-work , the smuggling brig getting
ready to be off with the tide . Guy Mannering penetrated into the
courtyard , and was standing there quietly , thinking of the past
greatness of the house of Bertram , when suddenly , from a chamber to the
left , he heard the voice of the gipsy , Meg Merrilies . A few steps took
him to a recess from which , unseen himself , he could observe what she
was doing . She continued to twirl her distaff , seemingly unconscious of
his presence , and also , after her own fashion , to  " spae " the fortune of
young Harry Bertram , just as Mannering had so lately been doing himself . 
Curiosity as to whether their results would agree kept him quiet while
she wove her spell . At last she gave her verdict :  " A long life , three
score and ten years , but thrice broken by trouble or danger . The threads
thrice broke , three times united . He ' ll be a lucky lad if he wins
through wi ' it ! " 

Mannering had hardly time to be astonished at the manner in which the
gipsy ' s prophecy confirmed his own half-playful calculations , before a
voice , loud and hoarse as the waves that roared beneath the castle , 
called to the witch-wife ,  " Meg , Meg Merrilies--gipsy--hag--tousand
deyvils ! " 

 " Coming , Captain--I am coming ! " answered Meg , as calmly as if some one
had been calling her pet names . Through the broken portion of the wall
to seaward a man made his appearance . He was hard of feature , 
savage-looking , and there was a cruel glint in his eyes which told of a
heart without pity . 

The man ' s body , powerful and thick-set as an oak , his immense strength , 
his savage temper made him shunned and disliked . There were few indeed
who would have ventured to cross the path of Dirk Hatteraick , whose best
name was  " black smuggler , " and whose worst a word it was safest to speak
in a whisper , lest a bird of the air should carry the matter . 

On the present occasion Dirk had come to the gipsy queen to demand of
her a charm for a fair wind and a prosperous voyage . For the less
religion such a man has , the more superstitious he is apt to be . 

 " Where are you , Mother Deyvilson ? " he cried again .  " Donner and blitzen , 
here we have been staying for you full half an hour ! Come , bless the
good ship and the voyage--and be cursed to ye for a hag of Satan ! " 

At that moment , catching sight of Mannering , the smuggler stopped with a
strange start . He thrust his hand into his pocket as if to draw out a
hidden weapon , exclaiming :  " What cheer , brother ? You seem on the
outlook , eh ? " 

But with a glance at the intruder Meg Merrilies checked him . In a moment
Hatteraick had altered his tone , and was speaking to Mannering civilly , 
yet still with an undercurrent of sullen suspicion which he tried to
disguise under a mask of familiarity . 

 " You are , I suppose , " said Mannering , calmly ,  " the master of that vessel
in the bay ? " 

 " Ay , ay , sir , " answered the sailor ,  " I am Captain Dirk Hatteraick of the
_Yungfrauw Hagenslaapen_ , and I am not ashamed of my name or of my
vessel , either . Right cognac I carry--rum , lace , real Mechlin , and
Souchong tea--if you will come aboard , I will send you ashore with a
pouchful of that last--Dirk Hatteraick knows how to be civil ! " 

Mannering got rid of his offers without openly offending the man , and
was well content to see the precious pair vanish down the stone stairs
which had formerly served the garrison of the castle in time of siege . 

On his return to the house of Ellangowan , Mannering related his
adventure , and asked of his host who this villanous-looking Dutchman
might be , and why he was allowed to wander at will on his lands . 

This was pulling the trigger , and Mr . Bertram at once exploded into a
long catalogue of griefs . According to him , the man was undoubtedly one
Captain Dirk Hatteraick , a smuggler or free-trader . As for allowing him
on his lands--well , Dirk was not very canny to meddle with . Besides , 
impossible as it was to believe , he , Godfrey Bertram of Ellangowan , was
not upon his Majesty ' s commission of the peace for the county . Jealousy
had kept him off--among other things the ill-will of the sitting member . 
Besides which--after all a gentleman must have his cognac , and his lady
her tea and silks . Only smuggled articles came into the country . It was
a pity , of course , but he was not more to blame than others . 

Thus the Laird maundered on , and Mannering , glad to escape being asked
about the doubtful fortune which the stars had predicted for the young
heir , did not interrupt him . On the next day , however , before he mounted
his horse , he put the written horoscope into a sealed envelope , and , 
having strictly charged Bertram that it should not be opened till his
son reached the age of five years , he took his departure with many
expressions of regret . 

The next five years were outwardly prosperous ones for Godfrey Bertram
of Ellangowan . As the result of an election where he had been of much
service to the winning candidate , he was again made a Justice of the
Peace , and immediately he set about proving to his brothers of the bench
that he could be both a determined and an active magistrate . But this
apparent good , brought as usual much of evil with it . Many old kindly
customs and courtesies had endeared Godfrey Bertram to his poorer
neighbours . He was , they said , no man ' s enemy , and even the gipsies of
the little settlement would have cut off their right hands before they
touched a pennyworth belonging to the Laird , their patron and protector . 
But the other landlords twitted him with pretending to be an active
magistrate , and yet harbouring a gang of gipsies at his own door-cheek . 
Whereupon the Laird went slowly and somewhat sadly home , revolving
schemes for getting rid of the colony of Derncleugh , at the head of
which was the old witch-wife Meg Merrilies . 

Occasions of quarrel were easy to find . The sloe-eyed gipsy children
swinging on his gates were whipped down . The rough-coated donkeys
forbidden to eat their bite of grass in peace by the roadside . The men
were imprisoned for poaching , and matters went so far that one stout
young fellow was handed over to the press-gang at Dumfries and sent to
foreign parts to serve on board a man-of-war . 

The gipsies , on their side , robbed the Ellangowan hen-roosts , stole the
linen from my lady ' s bleaching-green , cut down and barked the young
trees--though all the while scarce believing that their ancient friend
the Laird of Ellangowan had really turned against them . 

During these five years the son , so strangely brought into the world on
the night of Mannering ' s visit , had been growing into the boldest and
brightest of boys . A wanderer by nature from his youth , he went
fearlessly into each nook and corner of his father ' s estates in search
of berries and flowers . He hunted every bog for rushes to weave
grenadiers ' caps , and haled the hazelnuts from the lithe coppice boughs . 

To Dominie Sampson , long since released from his village school , the
difficult task was committed of accompanying , restraining , and guiding
this daring spirit and active body . Shy , uncouth , awkward , with the
memory of his failure in the pulpit always upon him , the Dominie was
indeed quite able to instruct his pupil in the beginnings of learning , 
but it proved quite out of his power to control the pair of twinkling
legs belonging to Master Harry Bertram . Once was the Dominie chased by a
cross-grained cow . Once he fell into the brook at the stepping-stones , 
and once he was bogged in his middle in trying to gather water-lilies
for the young Laird . The village matrons who relieved Dominie Sampson
on this last occasion , declared that the Laird might just as well  " trust
the bairn to the care o ' a tatie-bogle ! " [2] But the good tutor , nothing
daunted , continued grave and calm through all , only exclaiming , after
each fresh misfortune , the single word  " Prodeegious ! " 

Often , too , Harry Bertram sought out Meg Merrilies at Derncleugh , where
he played his pranks among the gipsies as fearlessly as within the walls
of Ellangowan itself . Meanwhile the war between that active magistrate
Godfrey Bertram and the gipsies grew ever sharper . The Laird was
resolved to root them out , in order to stand well with his brother
magistrates . So the gipsies sullenly watched while the ground officer
chalked their doors in token that they must  " flit " at the next term . 

At last the fatal day arrived . A strong force of officers summoned the
gipsies to quit their houses , and when they did not obey , the sheriff ' s
men broke down the doors and pulled the roofs off the poor huts of
Derncleugh . 

Godfrey Bertram , who was really a kindly man , had gone away for the day
to avoid the sight , leaving the business to the chief exciseman of the
neighbourhood , --one Frank Kennedy , a bold , roistering blade , who knew no
fear , and had no qualms whatever about ridding the neighbourhood of a
gang of  " sorners and thieves , " as he called the Derncleugh gipsies . 

But as Godfrey was riding back to Ellangowan with a single servant , 
right in the middle of the King ' s highway , he met the whole congregation
of the exiles , evicted from their ruined houses , and sullenly taking
their way in search of a new shelter against the storms of the oncoming
winter . His servant rode forward to command every man to stand to his
beast ' s head while the Laird was passing . 

 " He shall have his half of the road , " growled one of the tall thin
gipsies , his features half-buried in a slouch hat ,  " but he shall have no
more . The highway is as free to our cuddies as to his horse . " 

Never before had the Laird of Ellangowan received such a discourteous
reception . Anxious at the last to leave a good impression , he stammered
out as he passed one of the older men ,  " And your son , Gabriel Baillie , 
is he well ? "  ( He meant the young man who had been sent by means of the
press-gang to foreign parts . ) With a deep scowl the old man replied ,  " If
I had heard otherwise , _you_ would have heard it too ! " 

At last Godfrey Bertram thought that he had escaped . He had passed the
last laden donkey of the expelled tribe . He was urging his beast toward
Ellangowan with a saddened spirit , when suddenly at a place where the
road was sunk between two high banks , Meg Merrilies appeared above him , 
a freshly cut sapling in her hand , her dark eyes flashing anger , and her
elf-locks straying in wilder confusion than ever . 

 " Ride your ways , Laird of Ellangowan , " she cried ,  " ride your ways , 
Godfrey Bertram ! This day ye have quenched seven smoking hearths--see if
the fire in your own parlour burns the brighter for that ? Ye have riven
the thatch off seven cottars ' houses--look if your roof-tree stands the
faster . There are thirty yonder that would have shed their lifeblood for
you--thirty , from the child of a week to the auld wife of a hundred , 
that you have made homeless , that you have sent out to sleep with the
fox and the blackcock . Our bairns are hanging on our weary backs--look
to it that your braw cradle at hame is the fairer spread ! Now ride your
ways , Godfrey Bertram . These are the last words ye shall ever hear from
Meg Merrilies , and this the last staff that I shall ever cut in the
bonny woods of Ellangowan ! " 

And with the gesture of a queen delivering sentence she broke the
sapling she had held in her hand , and flung the fragments into the road . 
The Laird was groping in his pocket for half a crown , and thinking
meanwhile what answer to make . But disdaining both his reply and his
peace-offering , Meg strode defiantly downhill after the caravan . 

 * * * * *

Not only was there war by land at Ellangowan . There was also war by sea . 
The Laird , determined for once not to do things by halves , had begun to
support Frank Kennedy , the chief revenue officer , in his campaign
against the smugglers . Armed with Ellangowan ' s warrant , and guided by
his people who knew the country , Kennedy swooped down upon Dirk
Hatteraick as he was in the act of landing a large cargo upon
Ellangowan ' s ground . After a severe combat he had been able to clap the
government broad-arrow upon every package and carry them all off to the
nearest customs ' post . Dirk Hatteraick got safely away , but he went , 
vowing in English , Dutch , and German , the direst vengeance against Frank
Kennedy , Godfrey Bertram , and all his enemies . 

It was a day or two after the eviction of the gipsies when the Lady of
Ellangowan , suddenly remembering that it was her son Harry ' s fifth
birthday , demanded of her husband that he should open and read the
horoscope written by the wandering student of the stars five years
before . While they were arguing about the matter , it was suddenly
discovered that little Harry was nowhere to be found . His guardian , 
Dominie Sampson , having returned without him , was summoned to give an
account of his stewardship by the angry mother . 

 " Mr . Sampson , " she cried ,  " it is the most extraordinary thing in the
world wide , that you have free up-putting in this house , --bed , board , 
washing , and twelve pounds sterling a year just to look after that
boy , --and here you have let him out of your sight for three hours at a
time ! " 

Bowing with awkward gratitude at each clause in this statement of his
advantages , the poor Dominie was at last able to stammer out that Frank
Kennedy had taken charge of Master Harry , in the face of his protest , 
and had carried him off to Warroch Head to see the taking of Dirk
Hatteraick ' s ship by the King ' s sloop-of-war , which he had ridden all
the way to Wigton Bay to bring about . 

 " And if that be so , " cried the Lady of Ellangowan ,  " I am very little
obliged to Frank Kennedy . The bairn may fall from his horse , or anything
may happen . " 

The Laird quieted his wife by telling her that he and Frank Kennedy had
together seen the sloop-of-war giving chase to Dirk Hatteraick ' s ship , 
and that even then the Dutchman , disabled and on fire , was fast drifting
upon the rocks . Frank Kennedy had ridden off to assist in the capture by
signalling to the man-of-war from Warroch Head , and had evidently picked
up little Harry upon the way . He would doubtless , continued the Laird , 
be back in a little time . For he had ordered the punch-bowl to be made
ready , that they might drink good luck to the King ' s service and
confusion to all smugglers and free-traders wherever found . 

But hour after hour went by , and neither Frank Kennedy nor the boy Harry
returned . The night approached . Parties of searchers anxiously beat the
woods and patrolled the cliffs . For long they found nothing , but at last
a boat ' s crew , landing perilously at the foot of the precipices , came
upon the body of the excise officer , a sword-cut in his head , lying
half in and half out of the water . He had been flung from the cliffs
above . Frank Kennedy was dead--as to that there was no question . But
what had become of the child , Harry Bertram ? That--no one could answer . 
Not a trace of him was to be found . The smuggler ' s ship still burned
fiercely , but Dirk Hatteraick and his men had completely vanished . Some
one suggested the gipsies , whereupon the Laird mounted the first horse
he came across and rode furiously to the huts of Derncleugh . Bursting in
a door , he found on the ruined hearth of the house that had once
sheltered Meg Merrilies , a fire still smouldering . But there , too , 
Godfrey Bertram discovered nothing and no one . 

While he remained on the spot , dazed and uncertain , looking at the
blackened hearthstone , his old servant entered hastily to bid him return
at once to Ellangowan . His wife had been taken dangerously ill . Godfrey
spurred as fast as horse would carry him , but Death had gone faster , and
had arrived before him . When he reached the gate , the Lady of Ellangowan
was dead , leaving him with a little baby girl less than an hour old . The
shock of Kennedy ' s murder and her own little Harry ' s loss had killed
her . 



INTERLUDE OF INTERROGATION

 The melancholy conclusion of the first _Guy
 Mannering_ tale kept the children quieter than
 usual . I think they regretted a little the gallant
 opening of _Waverley_ , but as ever they were full
 of questions . 

  " And all that happened here , in our Galloway ? " 
 began Sweetheart , looking about her at the hills of
 dark heather and the sparkling Solway sands , from
 which the storm-clouds were just beginning to lift . 

  " Yes , " I answered her ,  " though it is doubtful if
 Scott ever _was_ in Galloway . But he had seen
 Criffel across from Dumfries-shire , and the castle
 of Ellangowan is certainly described from the ruins
 of Caerlaverock , opposite New Abbey . Besides , had
 he not good old Joseph Train , the Castle Douglas
 exciseman , to tell him everything--than whom no man
 knew Galloway better ? " 

  " Did gipsies really steal children ? " said Maid
 Margaret , with some apprehension . She was somewhat
 anxious , for an affirmative answer might interfere
 with certain wide operations in blackberrying which
 she was planning . 

  " Sometimes they did , " I answered ,  " but not nearly
 so often as they were blamed for . They had usually
 enough mouths of their own to feed . So , unless they
 were sure of a ransom , or perhaps occasionally for
 the sake of revenge , gipsies very seldom were
 guilty of kidnapping . " 

  " But they always do steal them in books , " said Hugh
 John;  " well , I would just like to see them cart me
 off ! And if they took Sir Toady Lion , they would
 soon send him back . He eats so much ! " 

 This was Hugh John ' s idea of a joke , and somewhat
 hastily I interrupted fraternal strife by returning
 to the general subject . 

  " Adam Smith , a very learned man , who afterwards
 wrote _The Wealth of Nations_ , was stolen by
 gipsies when a child , " I said . 

  " _I_ wish they had just kept him , " said Hugh John , 
 unexpectedly;  " then we wouldn ' t have had to
 paraphrase the beastly thing at school . It is as
 full of jaw-breakers as a perch is full of bones . " 

  " Was little Harry really stolen by gipsies , or was
 he killed over the cliff ? " queried Maid Margaret . 

  " Of course he was stolen , silly , " broke in Sir
 Toady Lion , sagely;  " look how much more of the book
 there has got to be all about him . Think there
 would be all that , if he got killed right at the
 beginning , eh ? " 

  " Do any people smuggle nowadays ? " demanded Hugh
 John . 

  " Of course they do--in Spain , " interjected Sir
 Toady Lion ,  " father got put in prison there once . " 

  " That was all owing to a mistake , " I explained
 hastily  ( for really this had nothing to do with
 Scott ) ;  " it was only because your parent happened
 to be wearing the same kind of hat as a certain
 well-known smuggler , a very desperate character . " 

  " HUM-M ! " said Sir Toady Lion , suddenly developing a
 cold in the nose . 

  " Well , anyway , they do smuggle--though not much in
 this country now , " said Sweetheart ,  " and I ' m glad
 father knew a man who smuggled in Spain . It makes
 this book so much more real . " 

  " Getting put in prison instead of him made it
 almost _too_ real , " said Sir Toady . He is a most
 disconcerting and ironical boy . One often wonders
 where he gets it from . 

 So to shut off further questioning , I proceeded
 immediately with the telling of the second tale
 from _Guy Mannering_ . 


