A beautiful queen , whose subjects adored her , and whose husband
thought her the best woman in the world , had but one sorrow , which was
equally a sorrow both to the king and the country--she brought him no
heir to the throne . She , at last , grew so melancholy , that she was
ordered for her health to drink the medicinal waters that were found
in a celebrated wood; and one day , sitting beside one of these
fountains , which fell into a marble and porphyry basin , she sent all
her ladies away , that she might the better weep and lament unobserved . 

 " How unhappy am I , " said she;  " five years I have been married , and am
still childless , while the poorest women in the land have children by
the dozen . Am I to die without ever giving the king an heir ? " 

While she spoke , she noticed that the water of the fountain was
slightly disturbed , and there issued thence a large cray-fish , who
thus addressed her ,  " Great queen , you shall have what you desire; but
first you must go to the fairy-palace which is near here , though so
surrounded by mists and clouds as to be invisible to mortal eyes , 
unless you will be conducted there by a poor cray-fish . " 

Though very much surprised , the queen answered courteously that she
had no objection , except that the animal ' s method of walking would not
well suit her own . 

The shell-fish smiled--if a shell-fish can smile--and immediately took
the shape of a pretty little old woman .  " Madam , " said she ,  " we now
need not walk crab-fashion . Consider me as your friend , for , indeed , I
am desirous of being so . " 

So saying , she jumped out of the fountain , her clothes not being the
least wet , though they were made of white and crimson velvet , nor her
grey hair damp : it was tied with green ribbons , and appeared all in
order and smooth as silk . She saluted the queen , and then conducted
her by a road which , strange to say , well as she knew every portion of
the wood , her majesty had never before seen , to a palace of which the
walls , roofs , and balconies were built entirely of diamonds . 

 " Is all this a dream ? " cried the delighted queen . 

But no , it was a reality , for the gates straightway opened , and six
beautiful fairies appeared , who , making her a profound reverence , 
presented her with six flowers composed of jewels : a rose , a tulip , an
anemone , a jasmine , a carnation , and a heartsease . 

 " Madam , " said they ,  " we could not give you a greater mark of our
favour than in permitting you to come here . We are delighted to tell
you that by and by you will have a little daughter , whom you must
name Désirée--the Desired . As soon as she is born , call us , and we
will endow her with all sorts of good qualities . You have only to take
this bouquet , and name each separate flower , thinking of us , when
immediately we shall be present in your chamber . " 

The queen , transported with joy , embraced all the fairies , spent the
day with them , and returned , laden with presents , to the fountain
side; where the little old woman jumped into the water , became a
cray-fish again , and disappeared . 

In due time the Princess Désirée was born , and the queen did as she
was told in naming the flowers . Soon , all the six fairies appeared , in
different chariots; of ebony , drawn by white pigeons--of ivory , drawn
by black crows , and so on , in great variety . They entered the royal
chamber with an air at once cheerful and majestic , embraced the queen
and the little princess , and spread out all their presents . These
were , linen , so fine that none but fairy hands could have spun it;
lace and embroidery without end; and a cradle , the wonder of the
world . It was made of wood more precious than gold , and at each corner
stood four animated images , little cupids , who , as soon as the baby
cried , began to rock it of their own accord . Then the six fairies
kissed and dandled the princess , bestowing on her for her portion
beauty , good temper , good health , talents , long life , and the faculty
of doing thoroughly well everything she tried to do . The queen , 
overcome with gratitude , was thanking them with all her heart for
their kindness to her little daughter , when she saw enter her chamber
a cray-fish , so large that it could hardly pass through the door . 

 " Ungrateful queen , " said the crab ,  " have you forgotten the fairy of
the fountain ? You sent for these my sisters , and not for me , who am
the one to whom you owed most of all . " 

The queen made a hundred apologies , and the six fairies tried vainly
to pacify the other one; but she was determined , as she said , to
punish ingratitude .  " However , " added she ,  " I will give no worse gift
to the princess than to warn you , that if you let her see daylight
before she is fifteen years old , you will repent it . " So saying , she
retired backwards , crab-fashion , resisting all entreaties to resume
her proper form and join in the festivities . 

The afflicted mother took council with the six fairies how she was to
save her baby from this impending evil , and after many conflicting
opinions they advised her to build a tower without doors or windows , 
and with a subterranean entrance , which the princess might inhabit
till she had passed the fatal age . Everything is easy to fairies; so
three strokes of their wands , making eighteen strokes in all , began
and finished the edifice . It was built of green and white marble , 
ornamented inside with diamonds and emeralds , and hung with
tapestry--all fairy work--on which was pictured the lives of heroes . 
Though there was only lamp-light allowed , yet the lamps were so
numerous , that they made the tower seem as bright as day . Whether the
princess was ever permitted any fresh air , or taken out for a walk by
starlight or moonlight , the history does not say; but it does say one
thing , that she grew up very happy , very lovely , and very well
educated . 

The six fairies came frequently to see her , and were most kind and
affectionate to her; but the one she loved best among them all was
Tulip . By this fairy ' s advice , the nearer she approached the age of
fifteen , the more carefully was Désirée shut up from daylight . But her
mother , who was very proud of her beauty , caused her portrait to be
painted , and sent among all the neighbouring courts , in order that
some prince might seek her in marriage . There was one prince who was
so captivated by this likeness , that he shut himself up with it , and
talked to it , as if it had been alive , making love to it in the most
passionate manner , and then falling into a hopeless melancholy . 

When his father tried to discover the cause of this-- " Sir , " said
Prince Warrior  ( he went by that name , because , young as he was , he had
already gained three battles ) ,  " my grief is that you wish me to marry
the Black Princess , while I will only marry the Princess Désirée . I
have seen her portrait , and without her I shall surely die . Behold
her ! " 

The king looked at the portrait .  " Well , my son , I cannot wish for a
more charming daughter-in-law , we will retract our offers for the
Black Princess , and send an ambassador to propose for the Princess
Désirée . " 

The prince , kissing his father ' s hand , overwhelmed him with his
gratitude and joy . A courtier , Becafico by name , young and gallant , 
was despatched with eighty equipages , a hundred mounted squires , and
the portrait of the Prince Warrior , to ask the Princess Désirée in
marriage . The report of his splendours travelled before him , till it
reached the ears of the king and queen , and of the six fairies , who
were all equally delighted . 

 " But , " said the Fairy Tulip , who was the sagest of them ,  " beware , 
queen , of allowing Becafico to see our child , " as they tenderly called
Désirée ,  " and do not upon any account suffer her to leave her tower
for the kingdom of Prince Warrior until her fifteenth birthday is
past . " 

The ambassador arrived; his magnificent train took twenty-three days
in going through the gates of the city . He made his harangue to the
king and queen , and much state ceremonial passed between them; then he
begged for the honour of an audience with the princess , and was very
much astonished to find it denied him--still more so , when the king
candidly told him the whole story . 

The queen had strictly enjoined the ladies of honour not to tell her
daughter one word of the ambassador ' s visit , or her intended marriage;
yet somehow the princess already knew it quite well . But she was wise
enough to say nothing about it; and when her mother showed her the
prince ' s portrait , and asked her if she should like such a gallant
young man for her husband , she replied humbly that she should be
quite satisfied with any choice her parents made for her . So her hand
was promised , but as she still wanted three months of fifteen , the
prince was requested to wait thus long . 

He took this delay so much to heart , that he could neither eat nor
sleep; meantime Désirée was little better--she did nothing but look at
the prince ' s portrait , and was exceedingly irritable with Longthorn
and Gilliflower , her two maids of honour . The other lady--the Black
Princess--was in equally sore plight , for she , too , had fallen in love
with the prince ' s portrait , and his rejection of her hand offended her
much . 

 " What , " said she to the ambassador ,  " your master does not find me
handsome enough , or rich enough ? " 

 " Madam , " said the ambassador ,  " as much as a subject dare blame a
sovereign , I blame my prince; had I the first throne in the world , I
should know to whom to offer it . " 

He said this , because he feared the bastinado , for Ethiopians are warm
haters as well as warm lovers . The Black Princess was softened , and
dismissed him , on which he gladly took himself out of the country . 

But the Ethiopian lady was too deeply offended with Prince Warrior to
pardon him so readily . She mounted her ivory car , drawn by six
ostriches which ran at the rate of six leagues an hour , and went to
the palace of her godmother , the Fairy of the Fountain , who had been
so offended by being forgotten at the birth of Désirée . Arrived
there , she unfolded all her annoyances . The fairy consoled her , and
promised to aid her in her revenge . 

Meantime Becafico had travelled with all diligence to the capital of
Désirée ' s father , where with earnest entreaties he begged that the
princess might be sent back with him to her betrothed spouse , who
otherwise would certainly die; at which tidings the princess herself
was so much moved that she fainted away . Thus her parents discovered
how deeply in love she was with Prince Warrior . 

 " Do not disquiet yourself , my dear child , " said the queen;  " if the
prince suffers , it is you who can console him . My only fear is on
account of the menaces of the Fairy of the Fountain . " 

But Désirée was so eager to start , that she suggested being sent away
in a closed carriage , where the light of day should never penetrate , 
and which should only be opened at night-time to give her food . She
was willing to suffer any inconvenience for the sake of saving the
life of Prince Warrior . 

The parents assented . So there was built a magnificent equipage of
green velvet outside , and lined with rose-colour and silver brocade . 
It was very large , but it shut up as tight as a box , and it had a huge
lock , the key of which was entrusted to one of the highest noblemen of
the court . In this carriage Désirée was placed , after most affecting
adieus , by her father and mother; and with her were sent her maids of
honour Longthorn and Gilliflower , and a lady-in-waiting , who was the
mother of both . Now , Longthorn cared little for the princess , but she
cared very much for Prince Warrior , whose portrait she had seen; and
when the bridal train departed , she said to her mother that she should
certainly die if this marriage were accomplished; so the mother , 
notwithstanding the confidence placed in her by queen , that she should
watch over the princess , and carefully seclude her from daylight until
she had reached the age of fifteen , yielded to her own child ' s
persuasions , and determined to betray her trust . 

Longthorn , who learned each evening from the officers of the
household , when they came to bring the princess her supper , how far
they were on their journey , at last persuaded her mother , who put off
the cruel act as long as she could , that it would never do to wait any
longer . They were nearly at the capital , and the young prince might , 
in his impatience , come to meet them , and the opportunity be lost . So
next day , at noon , when the sun was at the hottest , the
lady-in-waiting took out a knife , which she had brought with her for
the purpose , cut a large hole in the side of the carriage where they
were all shut up together , and the princess , for the first time in her
life , beheld daylight . She uttered a deep sigh , and immediately leaped
out of the carriage in the form of a white hind , which fled away like
lightning , and hid itself in the thickest recesses of a neighbouring
wood . 

None of the train perceived her , or if they had , they would not have
known it was she; besides , the Fairy of the Fountain immediately sent
such a storm of thunder and lightning that the whole cavalcade took
shelter in the nearest place they could find . The only persons who
knew what had happened were Longthorn , her mother , and Gilliflower;
but Gilliflower , overwhelmed with grief , had sprung out of the
carriage after her beloved mistress; so the two others were left
alone . Longthorn immediately put on the garments of Désirée , and
adorned herself with her royal mantle , her crown of diamonds , her
sceptre of a single ruby , and the globe which she carried in her left
hand , composed of one enormous pearl . Thus attired , with her mother
bearing her train , the false Désirée marched into the city--they two
alone; for , by the fairy ' s contrivance , the rest of the attendants had
been scattered in all directions . Longthorn doubted not the prince
would be already advancing to meet his bride , which was indeed the
case; though he was so weak that he had to be conveyed in a litter , 
surrounded by courtiers and knights , who all wore splendid armour and
green plumes , green being the favourite colour of the princess . Seeing
the two ladies so richly dressed , coming forward on foot and
unattended , they dismounted , and respectfully greeted them . 

 " May I inquire , " said Longthorn ,  " who is in that litter ? " 

 " Madam , " replied a knight ,  " it is the Prince Warrior , who comes to
meet his betrothed , the Princess Désirée . " 

 " Tell him , " said Longthorn ,  " that I am she . A fairy , jealous of my
happiness , has driven away all my attendants , but that I am Désirée is
proved by these my royal ornaments , and the letters of my father , 
borne by my lady-of-honour here . " 

Immediately the courtiers kissed the hem of her robe , and made all
diligence to announce to the prince , and the king his father , who
accompanied him , that the Princess Désirée had arrived . 

 " What ! " cried the king;  " arrived here in full daylight ? " But the
prince , burning with impatience , asked no questions , except about the
lady herself-- " Is she not a miracle of beauty--according to her
portrait ? " There was no reply .  " You are afraid to speak , gentlemen , 
lest you should praise her too much . " 

But the courtiers were still silent .  " Sir , " at last said one of the
boldest of them ,  " you had better go and see the princess yourself . " 

The prince , much surprised , would have thrown himself out of his
litter; but he was too feeble , and his father went instead . When the
king beheld the false princess , he involuntarily drew back; but the
lady-of-honour advancing boldly , said : 

 " Sire , this is the Princess Désirée;--I bear letters from the king and
queen her parents , and also a casket of priceless jewels , which they
charged me to place in your hands . " 

The king kept a mournful silence , and regarded his son , who now
approached , leaning on one of the courtiers . When he looked at the
girl , he recoiled with disgust; for she was so gaunt and tall that the
clothes of Désirée scarcely covered her knees , and her extreme
thinness , her red , hooked nose , her black and ill-shaped teeth , made
her as ugly as Désirée was beautiful . Prince Warrior , who for months
had thought of nothing but his lovely bride , stood petrified .  " King , " 
said he to his father ,  " I am betrayed ! this is not the lady whose
portrait was sent me , and to whom I have plighted my faith; I have
been deceived , and the deception will cost me my life . " 

 " What do I hear ? " replied Longthorn , haughtily .  " Prince , who has
deceived you ? you will be no victim in marrying me . " 

 " Ah ! my beautiful princess , " exclaimed the lady-of-honour ,  " it is we
who are victims . What a reception for one of your rank ! what
inconstancy--what falsehood ! But the king your father shall make them
hear reason . " 

 " We will make him hear reason ! " cried the other king , indignantly .  " He
promised us a beautiful princess , and he has sent us a skeleton , a
fright . I do not wonder he has kept it shut up for fifteen years , and
now he wishes to foist it upon us . " 

And without taking any more notice of Longthorn , he and his son
remounted each into his litter , and departed . 

Prince Warrior was so overcome by this unexpected affliction , that for
a long time he did not speak a word . Then he resolved , as soon as his
health allowed , to depart secretly from the capital , and seek some
solitary place where he might pass the remainder of his sad life . He
communicated this design to no one but the faithful Becafico , who
insisted upon following his fortunes wherever he went . So , one day , 
the prince left a letter for his father , assuring him , that as soon as
his mind was tranquillized he would return to the court , but imploring
that in the meantime no search might be made after him; then he and
Becafico departed together . 

Meanwhile , the poor white hind fled into the wood . She wandered about
till she came to a fountain , where , as in a mirror , she saw her own
changed shape , and wept , convulsed with grief . Then hunger began to
attack her--she bent her head , and browsed upon the green grass , which
she was surprised to find tasted very good . She laid herself down on a
bank of moss , but passed the night in extreme terror , hearing the wild
beasts roaring around her , and often forgetting that she was a hind , 
trying to save herself by climbing a tree like a human being . Daybreak
reassured her a little; she admired for the first time the wonderful
beauty of dawn; and when the sun rose , it appeared to her such a
marvellous sight that she could not take her eyes from it . She was
strangely comforted , spite of all her misfortune , by the charm that
she found out , every minute more and more , in the new world which now
for the first time she beheld in daylight . 

The Fairy Tulip , who loved Désirée , was very sorry for her , although
somewhat offended that the queen had not taken her advice , and
detained the princess safe in her tower till she was fifteen; however , 
she would not leave her a prey to the malice of the Fairy of the
Fountain , so contrived invisibly to conduct the faithful Gilliflower
to the place where the poor forlorn hind reposed . As soon as Désirée
saw her , she leaped the stream , and came towards her former companion , 
lavishing on her a thousand caresses . 

At first Gilliflower was very much astonished to be so taken notice of
by a deer of the forest; but looking at it attentively , she saw two
great tears rolling down from the soft human-like eyes , and some
instinct told her that it was her dear princess . She took the forefeet
of the hind , and kissed them as respectfully as if they had been her
mistress ' s hands . She spoke to her , and though the hind could not
reply , yet it was clear she understood , for the tears flowed faster
than ever , and she showed , by as much intelligence as a dumb beast
could possibly evince , that she responded to the love of the faithful
girl . When Gilliflower promised that she would never quit her , by a
hundred little signs the poor hind tried to express how happy she was . 

They passed the day together , Désirée leading her companion to a place
where she had seen plenty of wild fruits; so that Gilliflower , who was
dying of hunger , became strengthened and refreshed . But when night
came , the girl ' s terrors returned . 

 " Dear hind , " said she ,  " where shall we sleep ? If we stay here the wild
beasts will devour us; is there no little hut where we can hide ? " 

The poor hind shook her pretty head , and the tears again began to
flow , almost as if she were a human being . Her tears melted the heart
of the Fairy Tulip , who had watched her invisibly all the time , and
now made herself known--appearing suddenly in a shady alley of the
wood . Gilliflower and the white hind threw themselves at her feet--the
latter licking her hands , and caressing her as prettily as a deer
could--the former imploring her to take pity on the princess , and
restore her to her natural shape . 

 " I cannot do that , " said the fairy;  " her enemy has too much power; but
I can shorten her term of punishment , and soften it a little , by
granting that during every night she becomes a woman , though as soon
as day breaks she must again wander about as a hind of the forest . " 

It was a great comfort to be a woman every night; and the hind showed
her joy by innumerable leaps and bounds , which delighted the good
Tulip . 

 " Follow this by-path , " said she ,  " and you will find a hut that will
serve you as a quiet home . Farewell . " 

She disappeared , and Gilliflower , with the hind trotting after her , 
went on and on , till she came to a little hut , before which sat an old
woman , making a basket of osiers . 

 " My good woman , " said she ,  " have you a room to let , for me and my pet
here ? " 

 " Yes , truly , " replied the old woman; and took them into a room where
were two little beds , hung with white dimity , with fine white sheets , 
and everything as neat and comfortable as possible . As soon as it grew
dark , the princess recovered her own shape , and kissed and embraced a
thousand times her dear Gilliflower , who , on her part , was full of
delight and thankfulness . Then they had their supper , and went to
sleep in their two little beds . 

When morning broke , Gilliflower was awakened by a scratching , and
there she saw the hind , just as much a hind as before , waiting to be
let out . The faithful attendant opened the door , and the deer sprang
out quickly , and disappeared in the forest . 

Now , by an extraordinary chance , it happened that Prince Warrior , 
wandering about , indifferent to where he went , lost himself in this
very forest , where he had come with his companion Becafico . The
latter , seeking for fruits to satisfy their hunger , reached the same
cottage-door where the old woman lived , and being received kindly , 
asked her for some food for his master . She put some bread into a
basket , and was going to give it to him , when her charity made her
offer the wanderers shelter for the night . 

 " It is a poor cottage , " said she;  " but I have still one empty room , 
which will at least save you from being eaten up by wolves and lions . " 

So the prince was persuaded; and the old woman , who appeared ignorant
of his rank , admitted him and Becafico cautiously , so as not to
disturb the lady and the hind , who occupied the next room . Thus the
two lovers were so near , that they might almost have heard one another
speak , yet did not know it . 

The prince rarely slept much; his sorrow was still too great; and when
the first rays of the sun shone through his window , he arose , and
went out into the forest . There he wandered a long time without
finding any sure track : at last he came upon a sort of bower , overhung
with trees , and carpeted with moss , out of which started a beautiful
white hind , who immediately fled away . 

Now the prince had formerly been a great hunter , until his passion for
the chase was swallowed up by his love for Désirée; but the old fancy
returned when he saw the white hind . He could not help following her , 
and sending after her arrows , not a few , from the bow which he always
carried , causing her almost to die of fear; although , by the care of
the Fairy Tulip , she was not wounded . All through the day he pursued
her; until , towards twilight , she escaped from him towards the
cottage , where Gilliflower was watching in the utmost anxiety . The
faithful girl received tenderly into her arms the poor hind , 
breathless , exhausted; and eagerly awaited the moment when her
mistress should become a woman again , and tell her what had happened . 
When darkness came on , the deer vanished , and it was the Princess
Désirée who lay on Gilliflower ' s bosom . 

 " Alas ! " cried she , weeping ,  " I have more to fear than the Fairy of the
Fountain , and the wild beasts of the forest . I have been pursued all
day by a young hunter , whom I had scarcely seen , before he obliged me
to fly; and sent so many arrows after me that I marvel I was not
killed , or at least wounded . " 

 " My princess , you must never quit this room again , " said Gilliflower . 

 " I must; for the same enchantment which makes me a hind forces me to
do as hinds do . I feel myself every morning irresistibly compelled to
run into the wood , to leap and bound , and eat grass , and behave myself
exactly like a wild creature of the forest . Oh , how weary I am ! " 

Her soft eyes closed , and she fell asleep until the dawn of day , when
again she was driven out in the shape of a poor four-footed creature , 
to fulfil her sad destiny . 

The prince on his part came home also very much wearied and vexed . 
 " Becafico , " he said ,  " I have spent the day in chasing the most
beautiful hind I ever saw . She has slipped from me time after time
with the most wondrous adroitness; yet my arrows were so true that I
marvel how she escaped . At dawn to-morrow I must be after her once
more . " 

So he did not fail to go , at earliest dawn , to her hiding-place; but
the hind took care not to re-visit her favourite haunt . He sought her
everywhere , and could see nothing; then being very tired and hot , he
gathered some luscious apples which he saw hanging upon a tree over
his head . As soon as he ate them he fell fast asleep . 

Meantime the hind , roaming stealthily about , came to the place where
he lay--came quite suddenly , or else she would have taken to flight;
but now seeing her enemy sound asleep , she paused a minute to look at
him; and in his features , wasted with grief , but still so loveable
and beautiful , she recognised the face which had long been engraven on
her heart . The poor hind ! she crouched down at a little distance , and
watched him , her eyes beaming with joy . Then she sighed : at length , 
become bolder , she approached nearer , and softly touched him with her
fore-foot . 

Awaking , what was the prince ' s surprise to see beside him , tame and
familiar , the pretty creature whom he had hunted all yesterday; but
when he put out his hand to seize her , she fled away like lightning . 
He followed with all the speed he could , and thus , she flying and he
pursuing , they passed the whole day . Towards evening her strength
failed; and when the hunter came up to her it was a poor half-dying
deer that he found lying on the grass . She thought her death was
certain--still , from his hands , it did not seem so terrible as from
any one else; but instead of killing her he caressed her . 

 " Beautiful hind , " said he ,  " do not be afraid . I only wish to take you
home with me , and have you with me always . " He cut branches of trees , 
wove them ingeniously into a sort of couch , which he strewed with
roses and moss; then took the creature in his arms , laid her gently
down upon them , and sat beside her , feeding her from time to time with
the softest grass he could find . She ate contentedly from his hand , 
and he almost fancied she understood all the sweet things he said to
her , and so time passed till it grew dusk . 

 " My pretty hind , " said he ,  " I will go in search of a stream where you
can drink , and then we will take our way home together . " But while he
was absent she stole away , and had only time to reach the cottage when
the transformation happened , and it was not a hind but a weeping
princess who threw herself on the bed beside the faithful Gilliflower . 

 " I have seen him ! " she cried .  " My Prince Warrior is himself in this
forest : he was the hunter who has pursued me these two days , and has
taken me at last . But he did not slay me : he saved and caressed me . 
Ah , he is gentler and sweeter even than the image in my heart . " 

Here she began again to weep; but Gilliflower consoled her , and they
went to sleep , wondering much how this adventure would end . 

The prince , returning from the stream , missed his beautiful white
hind , and came back to Becafico full of grief , mingled with a certain
anger at the ingratitude of the creature to whom he had been so kind . 
But at break of day he rose , determined again to pursue her . She , 
however , in order to avoid him , took a quite different route . Still , 
the forest was not so large , but that at last he saw her , leaping and
bounding among the bushes . Seized by an irresistible impulse , he shot
an arrow after her; it struck her , she felt a violent pain dart
through one of her slender limbs , and fell helpless on the grass . When
the prince came up to her , he was overcome with remorse for his
cruelty . He took a handful of herbs and bound up her wound , made her a
bed of branches and moss , laid her head upon his knees , and wept over
her . 

 " My lovely hind , " said he ,  " why did I wound you so cruelly ? You will
hate me , when I wish you to love me . " So he tended and cherished her
all day , and , towards nightfall , he knotted a ribbon round her neck , 
with the intention of gently leading her home . But she struggled with
him; and the struggle was so sore that Gilliflower , coming out in
search of her dear mistress , heard the rustling , and saw her hind in
the hunter ' s power . She rushed to rescue her , to the prince ' s great
astonishment . 

 " Whatever consideration I owe you , madam , " said he ,  " you must know
that you are committing a robbery; this hind is mine . " 

 " No , sir , she is mine , " returned Gilliflower , respectfully .  " She knows
she is , and will prove it if you will only give her a little liberty . 
My pretty pet , come and embrace me . " The hind crept into her arms . 
 " Now kiss me on my right cheek . " She obeyed .  " Now touch my heart . " She
laid her foot against Gilliflower ' s bosom . 

 " I allow she is yours , " said the prince , discontentedly .  " Take her and
go your ways . " 

But he followed them at a distance , and was very much surprised to see
them enter the cottage . He asked the old woman who the damsel was , but
she said she did not know , except that the lady and the hind lived
there together in solitude , and paid her well . But when Becafico , who
had eyes as sharp as needles , coming to meet his master , by chance
caught sight of Gilliflower , he recognised her at once . 

 " Here is some great mystery , " said he ,  " for that is the lady who was
the favourite of the Princess Désirée . " 

 " Do not utter that name , which only recalls my grief , " said the
prince , sadly; but Becafico , determined to gratify his curiosity , made
all sorts of inquiries , and discovered that Gilliflower was lodged in
the next room . 

 " I should like to see her again , " thought he;  " and since only a thin
partition divides us , I will bore a hole through . " 

He did so , and beheld a wonderful sight . There sat the fairest
princess in all the world , attired in a robe of silver brocade , her
hair falling in long curls , and her eyes sparkling through tears . 
Gilliflower knelt before her , binding up her beautiful arm , from which
the blood was flowing . 

 " Do not heed it , " sighed the princess;  " better let me die , for death
itself would be sweeter than the life I lead . Alas ! how hard it is to
be a hind all day; to see my betrothed , to feel his tenderness and
goodness , yet be unable to speak to him , or to tell him the fatal
destiny which divides me from him . " 

When Becafico heard this , words cannot describe his astonishment and
delight . He ran towards the prince , who sat moodily at the window . 
 " Sir , " cried he ,  " only look through this hole , and you will see the
original of the portrait which so fascinated you . " 

The prince looked , and recognised at once his beloved princess . He
would have died with joy , had he not believed himself deceived by
some enchantment . He knocked at the door , Gilliflower opened it; he
entered , and threw himself at the feet of Désirée . What followed--of
explanations , vows , tears , and embraces--was never very clearly
related , not even by Gilliflower and Becafico , who were present , but
who considerately drew aside , and spent the time in conversing with
one another . So passed the night; and anxiously they awaited for the
dawn , to see whether the beautiful princess would again become a hind
of the forest . But the day broke , grew clearer , brightened into
sunrise , and the princess , with the prince sitting beside her , 
remained a beautiful maiden still . Then came a knock at the door , and
there entered the little old woman , who had been such a kind hostess
for all this while . 

 " The period of enchantment is ended , my children , " said she .  " Go home
and be happy . " And then they knew her as no longer the little old
woman , but the Fairy Tulip , who had thus faithfully watched her
charge . 

So the bride and bridegroom returned to their capital , where the
marriage was solemnized with all splendour , and , at Désirée ' s request , 
Longthorn and her mother , who had been imprisoned by the old king ' s
order , were set free , with no further punishment than banishment to
their own country , where they were to remain for life . As for the
faithful Gilliflower , she stayed at court , with her beloved mistress , 
and became the wife of the equally faithful Becafico , who had served
Prince Warrior as devotedly as she the Princess Désirée . The two were
laden with wealth and honours , and shared the happiness of the other
two lovers , which was as great as any mortal could desire . After their
death the story of the White Hind of the Forest was commanded to be
written down in the archives of the state , and thence it has been told
in tradition , or sung in poetry , half over the world . 


