FRANK THE HIGHWAYMAN

FRANK OSBALDISTONE had come back from France to quarrel with his father . 
A merchant he would not be . He hated the three-legged stool , and he used
the counting-house quills to write verses with . 

His four years in Bordeaux had spoiled him for strict business , without
teaching him anything else practical enough to please his father , who , 
when he found that his son persisted in declining the stool in the dark
counting-room in Crane Alley , packed him off to the care of his brother , 
Sir Hildebrand Osbaldistone of Osbaldistone Hall in Northumberland , 
there to repent of his disobedience . 

 " I will have no idlers about me , " he said ,  " I will not ask even my own
son twice to be my friend and my partner . One of my nephews shall take
the place in the firm which you have declined . " 

And old Mr . Osbaldistone , of the firm of Osbaldistone and Tresham , 
merchants in London town , being above all things a man of his word , 
Master Frank took to the North Road accordingly , an exile from his home
and disinherited of his patrimony . 

At first he was gloomy enough . He was leaving behind him wealth , ease , 
society . As he looked back from the heights of Highgate , the bells of
the city steeples rang out their  " Turn again , Whittington ! " And to tell
the truth , Frank Osbaldistone felt half inclined to obey . But the
thought of his father ' s grave scorn held him to his purpose , and soon
the delights of travel and the quickly changing scene chased the sadness
from his heart . Indeed , as was natural to a young man , a good horse
under his thigh and fifty guineas in his pocket helped amazingly to put
him in the best humour with himself . 

The company Frank met with on the North Road was commonplace and dull . 
But one poor man , a sort of army officer in a gold-laced hat , whose
martial courage was more than doubtful , amused Frank Osbaldistone by
clinging desperately to a small but apparently very heavy portmanteau , 
which he carried on the pillion before him , never parting from it for a
moment . This man ' s talk was all of well-dressed highwaymen , whose
conversation and manners induced the unwary to join company with them . 
Then in some shady dell whistling up their men , the unlucky traveller
found himself despoiled--of his goods certainly , perhaps also of his
life . 

It delighted Frank ' s boyish humour beyond measure to play upon the fears
of this gallant King ' s officer--which he proceeded to do by asking him
first whether his bag were heavy or not , then by hinting that he would
like to be informed as to his route , and finally by offering to take the
bag on his own pillion and race him with the added weight to the nearest
village . 

This last audacious proposal almost took the man ' s breath away , and from
that moment he was convinced that Frank was none other than the  " Golden
Farmer " himself in disguise . 

At Darlington , the landlord of their inn introduced a Scotch cattle
dealer , a certain Mr . Campbell , to share their meal . He was a
stern-faced , dark-complexioned man , with a martial countenance and an
air of instinctive command which took possession of the company at once . 
The lawyer , the doctor , the clergyman , even Frank himself , found
themselves listening with deference to the words of this plainly
dressed , unobtrusive , Scottish drover . As for the man with the weighty
bag , he fairly hung upon his words . And especially so when the landlord
informed the company that Mr . Campbell had with his own hand beaten off
seven highwaymen . 

 " Thou art deceived , friend Jonathan , " said the Scot ,  " they were but two , 
and as beggarly loons as man could wish to meet withal ! " 

 " Upon my word , sir , " cried Morris , for that was the name of the man with
the portmanteau , edging himself nearer to Mr . Campbell ,  " really and
actually did you beat two highwaymen with your own hand ? " 

 " In troth I did , sir , " said Campbell ,  " and I think it nae great thing to
mak ' a sang about . " 

 " Upon my word , sir , " said Morris , eagerly ,  " I go northward , sir--I
should be happy to have the pleasure of your company on my journey . " 

And , in spite of short answers , he continued to press his proposal upon
the unwilling Scot , till Campbell had very unceremoniously to extricate
himself from his grip , telling him that he was travelling upon his own
private business , and that he could not unite himself to any stranger on
the public highway . 

The next day Frank approached Osbaldistone Hall , which stood under the
great rounded range of the Cheviot Hills . He could already see it
standing , stark and grey , among its ancestral oaks , when down the ravine
streamed a band of huntsmen in full chase , the fox going wearily before , 
evidently near the end of his tether . Among the rout and nearer to Frank
than the others , owing to some roughness of the ground , rode a young
lady in a man ' s coat and hat--which , with her vest and skirt , made the
first riding-habit Frank had ever seen . 

The girl ' s cheeks were bright with the exercise . Her singular beauty was
the more remarkable , chanced upon in so savage a scene . And when , after
hearing the  " Whoop--dead ! " which told of poor Reynard ' s decease , she
paused to tie up her loosened locks , Master Frank stared most
undisguisedly and even impolitely . 

One of the young huntsmen , clad in red and green , rode towards her , 
waving the brush in his hand as if in triumph over the girl . 

 " I see , " she replied ,  " I see . But make no noise about it . If Phoebe
here  ( patting the neck of her mare ) had not got among the cliffs , _you_
would have had little cause for boasting . " 

Then the two of them looked at Frank and spoke together in a low tone . 
The young man seemed sheepishly to decline some proposal which the girl
made to him . 

 " Then if you won ' t , Thornie , " she said at last ,  " I must . " 

And turning to Frank she asked him if he had seen anything of a friend
of theirs , one Mr . Francis Osbaldistone , who for some days past had been
expected at the Hall . 

Frank instantly and gladly claimed kindred . 

 " Then , " said the girl , smiling ,  " as this young man ' s politeness seems to
have fallen asleep , I must e ' en be master of the ceremonies , however
improper it may be . So I beg to present to you young Squire Thorncliff
Osbaldistone , your cousin , and Die Vernon , your accomplished cousin ' s
poor kinswoman . " 

The  " accomplished cousin " finally decided to shake hands with mingled
awkwardness and an assumption of sulky indifference . This being done , he
immediately announced his intention of going to help the huntsmen couple
up the hounds , and so he took himself off . 

 " There he goes , " said the young lady , following him with disdainful
eyes ,  " the prince of grooms and cock-fighters and blackguard
horse-racers . But truly there is not one of them to mend another ! " 

She turned sharply upon Frank . 

 " Have you read Markham ? " she demanded . 

Poor Frank had never even heard of that author . The girl held up her
hands in horror . 

 " Never to have heard of Markham--the Koran of this savage tribe--the
most celebrated author on farriery ! " she cried .  " Then I fear you are
equally a stranger to the more modern names of Gibson and Bartlett ? " 

 " I am , indeed , Miss Vernon , " answered Frank , meekly . 

 " And do you not blush to own it ? " she cried .  " Why , we will disown the
alliance . Then I suppose you can neither give a ball , nor a mash , nor a
horn ? " 

 " I confess , " said Frank ,  " I trust all these matters to my groom . " 

 " Incredible carelessness ! " she continued .  " What was your father thinking
of ? And you cannot shoe a horse , or cut his mane and tail . Or worm a
dog , or crop his ears , or cut his dew-claws; or reclaim a hawk or give
him casting-stones , or direct his diet when he is sealed ! Or-- " 

Frank could only once for all profess his utter ignorance of all such
accomplishments . 

 " Then in the name of Heaven , Mr . Frank Osbaldistone , what _can_ you
do ? " 

 " Very little to the purpose , I am afraid , Miss Vernon , " answered Frank;
 " only this--when my groom has dressed my horse I can ride him , and when
my hawk is in the field , I can fly him . " 

 " Can you do this ? " said Die Vernon , setting her horse to a rude gate
composed of pieces of wood from the forest , and clearing it at a bound . 
In a moment Frank was at her side . 

 " There are hopes for you yet , " she said .  " I was afraid that you were a
very degenerate Osbaldistone . But what brings you to Cub Hall ? I suppose
you could have stayed away if you had liked ? " 

 " The Cubs of the Hall may be as you describe them , " said Frank , looking
at his companion ,  " but I am convinced there is one exception that will
make amends for all their deficiencies . " 

 " Oh , you mean Rashleigh ! " said Die Vernon . 

 " Indeed , I do not , " said Frank , who had not been four years in France
for nothing ,  " I never even heard of Rashleigh . I mean some one very much
nearer me . " 

 " I suppose I should pretend not to understand you , " she answered ,  " but
that is not my way . If I were not in the saddle , I would make you a
courtesy . But seriously , I deserve your exception , for besides Rashleigh
and the old priest , I am the only conversable being about Osbaldistone
Hall . " 

 " And who , for Heaven ' s sake , is Rashleigh ? " 

 " Your youngest cousin , about your own age , but not so--so well-looking . 
Full of natural sense--learned , as being bred to the church , but in no
hurry to take orders--and in addition by all odds the cleverest man in a
country where such are scarce . " 

They rode back to the Hall , but as it was some time before Frank could
get any one to attend to his own horse and Diana ' s mare , which she had
left in his charge , he had time to look about him and take in the old
castle and its rough , wasteful prodigality of service . By and by , 
however , there arrived Sir Hildebrand , who , among his sons , seemed , by
comparison at least , both intelligent and a gentleman . He gave Frank a
rough but hearty welcome to his mansion . 

 " Art welcome , lad ! " he said .  " I would have seen thee before but had to
attend to the kennelling of the hounds . So thy father has thought on the
old Hall and old Sir Hildebrand at last ! Well , better late than never ! 
Here are thy cousins--Percie , Thornie , John , Dick , and Wilfred . But
where ' s Rashleigh ? Ay , here ' s Rashleigh ! Take thy long body aside , 
Thornie , and let ' s see thy brother a bit . And here ' s my little Die , my
sister ' s daughter , the prettiest girl on our dales , be the next who she
may . And so now let ' s to the sirloin ! " 

The five elder brethren of Osbaldistone Hall were all cast in one
mould--tall , well-formed , athletic men , but dull of feature and
expression , and seemingly without any intellect whatever . Rashleigh , the
youngest , was the exact opposite of his brethren . Short in stature , 
thick-set , and with a curious halt in his gait , there was something
about his dark irregular features--something evil , relentless , and
cruel , which even the assumed gentleness of his words and the melody of
his voice could not hide . His brothers were mere oafs in learning , none
of whom ever looked at printed paper save to make a fly-book of it . But
Rashleigh was learned , and , when he pleased , of manners exquisitely
refined . 

It was , however , Miss Diana who really introduced Frank to his cousins , 
and the ceremony took place that day at dinner , while the young men were
devoting themselves heartily to the meat which they piled up on their
platters . The clatter of knives and forks covered her voice . 

 " Your cousins , " she said ,  " taken all together , form a happy compound of
the sot , the gamekeeper , the bully , the horse-jockey , and the fool . But
as no two leaves off the same tree are quite exactly alike , so these
ingredients are differently mingled in your kinsmen . Percie , the son and
heir , has more of the sot than of the gamekeeper , bully , horse-jockey , 
or fool . My precious Thornie is more of the bully--John , who sleeps
whole weeks among the hills , has most of the gamekeeper . The jockey is
powerful with Dickon , who rides two hundred miles by day and night , to
be bought and sold himself at a race-meeting . And the fool so
predominates over Wilfred ' s other characteristics that he may be termed
a fool positive . " 

Though Frank pressed her , Die Vernon refused to add Sir Hildebrand to
her gallery of family portraits . 

 " I owe him some kindnesses , " she said ,  " or what at least were meant for
such . And besides , I like him . You will be able to draw his picture
yourself when you know him better . " 

Having once before been successful with a compliment , when talking to
his beautiful companion , Frank now summoned his French breeding and
tried a second . He had been silent for a minute , and Miss Vernon , 
turning her dark eyes on him , had said with her usual careless
frankness ,  " You are thinking of me ! " 

 " How is it possible , " answered Master Frank ,  " that I should think of
anything else , seated where I have the happiness to be . " 

But Diana only smiled with a kind of haughty scorn , and replied ,  " I must
tell you at once , Mr . Osbaldistone , that your pretty sayings are wholly
lost on me . Keep them for the other maids whom you will meet here in the
north . There are plenty who will thank you for them . As for me , I happen
to know their value . Come , be sensible ! Why , because she is dressed in
silk and gauze , should you think that you are compelled to unload your
stale compliments on every unfortunate girl ? Try to forget my sex . Call
me Tom Vernon . Speak to me as to a friend and companion , and you have no
idea how much I shall like you . " 

Frank ' s expression of amazement at these words egged on Diana to
further feats of daring . 

 " But do not misjudge me , " she said ,  " as I see you are likely to do . You
are inclined to think me a strange bold girl , half coquette , half romp , 
desirous , perhaps , of storming you into admiration . You never were more
mistaken . I would show as much favour to your father , as readily make
_him_ my confidant , if he were here--and if I thought he were capable of
understanding me . The truth is , I must speak of these things to some one
or die . " 

Frank changed the subject .  " Will you not add Rashleigh to the family
gallery ? " he said . 

 " No , no , " she said hastily ,  " it is never safe to speak of Rashleigh--no , 
not even when , as you now think , he has left the table . Do not be too
sure even of that--and when you speak of Rashleigh Osbaldistone , get up
to the top of Otterscope Hill , stand on the very peak , and speak in
whispers . And , after all , do not be too sure that a bird of the air may
not carry the matter . Rashleigh was my tutor for four years . We are
mutually tired of each other , and we shall heartily rejoice to be
separated ! " 

Nevertheless Rashleigh it was who had been selected in full family
conclave to take Frank ' s empty stool in the counting-house of
Osbaldistone , Tresham and Company in Crane Alley . Indeed , there was no
choice . His brothers were incapable even of the multiplication table . 
Besides , they wished him away , with the feelings of mice who hear that
the family cat is going off to fill another situation . Even his father , 
who stood no little in awe of his clever son , breathed more freely at
the thought of Osbaldistone Hall without Rashleigh . 

It was not long before Mr . Frank Osbaldistone had a taste of his cousin
Rashleigh ' s quality . The very next morning his uncle and cousins looked
at him curiously when he came down early . Sir Hildebrand even quoted a
rhyme for his benefit , 

  " He that gallops his horse on Blackstone Edge , 
 May chance to catch a fall . " 

It was a fox-hunting morning , and during a long run Frank sustained his
character as a good and daring rider , to the admiration of Diana and Sir
Hildebrand , and to the secret disappointment of his other kind
kinsfolk , who had prophesied that he would certainly  " be off at the
first burst , " chiefly for the reason that he had a queer , outlandish
binding round his hat . 

It was plain that Diana wanted to speak with him apart , but the close
attendance of Cousin Thornie for some time made this impossible . That
loutish youth ' s persistence finally fretted the girl , and having been
accustomed all her life to ride the straightest way to her desire , she
bade him be off to see that the earths above Woolverton Mill were duly
stopped . 

After some objections Thornie was got safely out of the road , and Diana
led the way to a little hill whence there was a fine view in every
direction . She pointed , as Frank thought , somewhat significantly to the
north . 

 " Yonder whitish speck is Hawkesmore Crag in Scotland , " she said ,  " the
distance is hardly eighteen miles , as the crow flies . Your horse will
carry you there in two hours--and I will lend you my mare if you think
her less blown . " 

 " But , " said Frank , quite mystified ,  " I have so little wish to be in
Scotland , that if my horse ' s head were in Scotland , I would not give his
tail the trouble of following . What should I do in Scotland , Miss
Vernon ? " 

 " Why , provide for your safety--do you understand me now , Mr . Frank ? " 

 " Less than ever , Miss Vernon , " he answered .  " I have not the most distant
conception of what you mean . " 

 " Why , then , " said Diana ,  " to be plain , there is an information lodged
with our nearest Justice of the Peace , Squire Inglewood , that you were
concerned in a robbery of government papers and money sent to pay the
troops in Scotland . A man with whom you travelled , and whom you
certainly frightened , has lodged such a complaint against you . His name
is Morris . " 

 " Morris has been robbed ? " 

 " Ay , " said Diana ,  " and he swears you are the man who robbed him . " 

 " Then Sir Hildebrand believes it ? " cried Frank . 

 " He does , " answered Diana ,  " and to tell the truth , so did I until this
moment . " 

 " Upon my word , I am obliged to you and my uncle for your opinion of me . " 

 " Oh , it is nothing to be ashamed of , " she said , smiling ,  " no mere
highway robbery . The man was a government messenger . We are all
Jacobites about here , and no man would have thought the worse of you for
bidding him stand and deliver . Why , my uncle had a message from Squire
Inglewood himself , that he had better provide for your safety by
smuggling you over the border into Scotland . " 

 " Tell me , " said Frank , somewhat impatiently ,  " where does this Squire
Inglewood live ? I will go and answer the charge instantly and in
person . " 

 " Well said--I will go with you , " said Diana , promptly ,  " it was never the
Vernon way to desert a friend in time of need . " 

Frank tried to dissuade her from this , but he could not combat the
girl ' s resolution . So they set off together for Inglewood Hall . As they
entered the courtyard , they met Rashleigh just coming out . 

Miss Vernon instantly challenged him , before he got time to make up a
story . 

 " Rashleigh , " she said ,  " you have heard of Mr . Frank ' s affair , and you
have been over to the Justice talking about it . " 

But Rashleigh was equally ready . 

 " Certainly , " he answered ,  " I have been endeavouring to render my cousin
what service I could . But at the same time I am sorry to meet him here . " 

 " As a friend and kinsman , Mr . Osbaldistone , " said Frank ,  " you should
have been sorry to meet me anywhere else but where my character is at
stake , and where it is my intention to clear it . " 

However , it was evidently not Miss Vernon ' s purpose to quarrel with
Rashleigh at that time . She led him apart , and began talking to him--at
first quietly , then with obvious anger . From her manner she was charging
him with knowing who had really committed the robbery , and pressing upon
him in some way to make plain his cousin ' s innocence . He resisted long , 
but at length gave way . 

 " Very well , then , " he said ,  " you are a tyrant , Diana . Still , it shall be
as you desire . But you know that you ought not to be here . You must
return with me at once ! " 

 " I will do no such thing , " said the girl;  " not a foot will I go back
till such time as I see Frank well out of the hands of the Philistines . 
He has been bidding me to go back all the time , himself . But I know
better . Also , I know you , my cousin Rashleigh , and my being here will
give you a stronger motive to be speedy in performing your promise . " 

Rashleigh departed in great anger at her obstinacy , and Frank and Die
together sought the den of the Justice , to which they were guided by a
high voice chanting the fag-end of an old bottle-song : 

  " Oh , in Skipton-in-Craven
 Is never a haven
 But many a day foul weather , 
 And he that would say
 A pretty girl nay
 I wish for his cravat a tether . " 

 " Hey day , " said Die Vernon ,  " the genial Justice must have dined
already--I did not think it had been so late . " 

As Diana had supposed , the Justice had dined . But though both his clerk
Jobson and Frank ' s accuser Morris were with him , he showed himself as
pleased to see Diana as he was evidently disinclined for all further
legal business . 

 " Ah , ha , Die Vernon , " he cried , starting up with great alacrity ,  " the
heath-bell of Cheviot and the blossom of the border , come to see how the
old bachelor keeps house ? Art welcome , girl , as the flowers in May ! " 

Miss Vernon told him that on this occasion she could not stay . She had
had a long ride that morning , and she must return at once . But if he
were a good kind Justice , he would immediately despatch young Frank ' s
business and let them go . 

This the  " good Justice " was very willing to do , but Clerk Jobson , alert
in his office , pressed that the law should have its course , while Frank
himself demanded no better than that the mystery should be cleared up
once and for all . 

Whereupon the man who had been robbed repeated his statement . He had , it
seemed , been first of all terrified by Frank ' s antics . And then on the
open moor , when he had found himself stopped , and relieved of his
portmanteau by two masked men , he had distinctly heard the name
 " Osbaldistone " applied by one of his assailants in speaking to the
other . He furthermore certified that all the Osbaldistones had been
Papists and Jacobites from the time of William the Conquerer . From which
it was clear that Frank was the guilty man ! 

Frank replied that it was true that , like a foolish , gamesome youth , he
had certainly practised somewhat on the fears of the man Morris , but
that he had never seen him since he parted from him at Darlington , and
that , far from being a Papist and a Jacobite , he could easily prove that
he had been brought up in the strictest school of Presbyterianism and in
full obedience to the government of King George . 

Clerk Jobson , however , was sharp enough to turn Frank ' s admissions
against him , and said that since he had voluntarily assumed the
behaviour of a robber or malefactor , he had by that very act brought
himself within the penalties of the law . 

But at this moment a letter was handed to the Clerk , which informed him
that a certain old Gaffer Rutledge was at the point of death , and that
he , Clerk Jobson , must go immediately to his house in order to settle
all his worldly affairs . 

The clerk , after offering to make out the warrant of commitment before
setting out , at last , and with great reluctance , rode away . Then the
Justice , who evidently still fully believed in Frank ' s guilt , counselled
him as a friend to let bygones be bygones , and to give Mr . Morris back
his portmanteau . Frank had hardly time to be indignant at this when a
servant announced-- " A stranger to wait upon the Justice ! " 

 " A stranger ! " echoed the Justice , in very bad temper;  " not upon
business , or I ' ll-- " But his protestation was cut short by the entrance
of the stranger himself , and by the stern deep voice of Mr . Campbell , 
who immediately produced his usual effect upon Squire Inglewood . 

 " My business is peculiar , " said the Scot ,  " and I ask your Honour to give
it your most instant consideration . " 

Then Mr . Campbell turned on Morris such a look of ferocity that it made
that valiant gentleman shake visibly from head to foot . 

 " I believe you cannot have forgotten what passed between us at our last
meeting , " he said ,  " and you can bear me witness to the Justice that I am
a man of fortune and honour . You will be some time resident in my
vicinity , and you know it will be in my power to do as much for you . 
Speak out , man , and do not sit there chattering your jaws like a pair of
castanets . " 

At last an answer was extracted from the trembling Mr . Morris , but with
as much difficulty as if it had been a tooth . 

 " Sir--sir-- , " he stammered ,  " yes--I do believe you to be a man of
fortune and of honour--I do believe it ! " 

 " Then , " said Campbell ,  " you will bear me witness that I was in your
company when the valise was stolen , but did not think fit to interfere , 
the affair being none of mine . Further you will tell the Justice that no
man is better qualified than I to bear testimony in this case . " 

 " No man better qualified , certainly , " assented Morris , with a heavy
sigh . In order to prove his character , Mr . Campbell put into the hands
of Justice Inglewood a certificate given under the seal and in the
handwriting of the great Duke of Argyle himself . The Justice , who had
stood by the Duke in 1714 , was duly impressed , and told the Scot that
his additional testimonial was perfectly satisfactory . 

 " And now , " he added ,  " what have you to say about this robbery ? " 

 " Briefly this , " said Mr . Campbell ,  " the robber for whom Mr . Morris took
Mr . Osbaldistone was both a shorter and a thicker man . More than that , I
saw under the false face he wore , when it slipped aside , that his
features were altogether different ! " 

Between terror and the determined attitude of Campbell , Morris was soon
forced to withdraw his information against Frank , and the Justice , glad
to be rid of so troublesome a case , instantly threw the papers into the
fire . 

 " You are now at perfect liberty , Mr . Osbaldistone , " said Squire
Inglewood ,  " and you , Mr . Morris , are set quite at your ease . " 

In spite of this Mr . Morris did not seem exactly comfortable , especially
as Mr . Campbell expressed his intention of accompanying him to the next
highway , telling him that he would be as safe in his company as in his
father ' s kailyard . 

 " Zounds , sir , " he said as they went out ,  " that a chield with such a
black beard should have no more heart than a hen-partridge . Come on wi ' 
ye , like a frank fellow , once and for all ! " 

The voices died away , the clatter of horses ' hoofs was heard , and after
a few kindly words from the Justice , Diana and Frank set out on their
way home . On the road they met Clerk Jobson returning in great haste and
in a most villanous temper . The will-making , even the illness of Gaffer
Rutledge , had proved to be a  " bam , " that is to say , a hoax . The clerk ' s
language became so impertinent towards Miss Vernon , that , if she had not
prevented him , Frank would certainly have broken the rascal ' s head . 

The revel was in full swing at Osbaldistone Hall when they returned . So
for the sake of peace Diana ordered some dinner to be brought to them in
the library . This was a large neglected room , walled about with great
books , into which hardly any of the Osbaldistones ever came , and which
accordingly Diana had appropriated as her peculiar sanctum . 

To this chamber Rashleigh Osbaldistone penetrated after dinner had been
removed . He came to explain the events of the day , but except that he
had met Campbell by chance , and that , having learned that he had been an
eye-witness to the robbery , he had sent him on to Squire Inglewood ' s , 
there was not much more that he seemed inclined to reveal . 

Afterwards , however , in his own room , Rashleigh became more
communicative . He desired to know what kind of man Frank ' s father was , 
with whom in future he was to be placed . And in return for this
information he told Frank what he wished to know as to Diana Vernon . She
was , said Rashleigh , to marry Thorncliff , according to a family compact
of long standing . But he intimated in addition that she would greatly
have preferred himself , and that , indeed , he had withdrawn from the care
of her studies on account of the too evident affection she had begun to
show towards one , who , as a son of the church , was destined never to
marry . 

This information rankled in Frank ' s mind , and all the next day he was
sullen and even brutal in his manner towards Miss Vernon . But she did
not grow angry , and merely left him to fill up the measure of his
folly--which he presently did by an affray with Rashleigh and his other
cousins over the wine-cups in the evening , in which swords were drawn
and blows given . 

The next morning , however , Miss Vernon called him to account . 

 " Upon my word , Mr . Francis Osbaldistone , " she said , seating herself in
one of the great chairs in the library , like a judge upon the bench , 
 " your character improves upon us . Last night ' s performance was a
masterpiece . You contrived to exhibit in the course of one evening all
the various qualifications of your several cousins--the gentle and
generous temper of Rashleigh , the temperance of Percie , the cool courage
of Thorncliff , John ' s skill in dog-breaking , Dickon ' s aptitude for
betting--all these were exhibited by the same Mr . Francis , and with a
choice of time and place worthy of the taste and sagacity of Wilfred . " 

Frank expressed his shame and sorrow as best he could . He had been
troubled , he said , by some information that he had received . 

Instantly Miss Vernon took him up . 

 " And now , " she said ,  " please tell me instantly what it was that
Rashleigh said of me--I have a right to know and know I will ! " 

It was some time before Frank could bring himself to tell Diana what her
cousin had really hinted concerning herself , and when she heard that he
had affirmed her wish to marry him in preference to Thorncliff , she
shuddered from head to foot . 

 " No , " she cried , all her soul instantly on fire ,  " any lot rather than
that--the sot , the gambler , the bully , the jockey , the insensate fool
were a thousand times preferable to Rashleigh ! But the convent , the
jail--the grave--shall be welcome before them all ! " 


INTERLUDE OF DISCUSSION

 At the abrupt close of the story the children
 looked not a little surprised , nor did they
 manifest their usual eagerness to rush out of doors
 and instantly to reduce the tale to action . 

 The first difficulty was as to who the real
 highwayman could be . 

  " Did Frank _really_ take the man ' s bag with the
 money and things ? " ventured Maid Margaret , a little
 timidly . She knew that she would be promptly
 contradicted . 

  " No , of course not , " shouted Hugh John ,  " it was the
 Scotch drover , Campbell , --for how else could he
 know so well about it ? Of course it was--_I_ knew
 it from the first . " 

 Meantime Sweetheart had been musing deeply . 

  " Do you know , " she said gently ,  " I am most of all
 sorry for Die Vernon . I don ' t think that I want to
 play in this story . It is too real . I think Die
 Vernon lived . " 

  " Why--didn ' t they all live ? " said Maid Margaret , 
 plaintively . For the world of books was still
 quite alive for her . She had not lost the most
 precious of all the senses . Dream-gold was as good
 as Queen ' s-head-gold fresh out of the mint for her . 
 Happy Maid Margaret ! 

  " I am sure Die Vernon was real , " Sweetheart went
 on;  " last night when you were all out cycle-riding
 and I was waiting for my Latin lesson , I read a bit
 of the book--a chapter that father has not told us . 
 And it made me sorry for Die . She wished that she
 had been born a man , so that she might say and do
 the same things as others . She was alone in the
 world , she said . She needed protection , yet if she
 said or did anything naturally , every one thought
 what a bold , forward girl she was ! I have felt that
 too ! " 

  " Rubbish ! " said Hugh John , in high remorseless
 scorn ,  " _you_ are not  ' alone in the world ! ' No , not
 much . And if we say or do anything to you , you
 jolly well whack us over the head . Why , the last
 time I called you-- " 

  " That will do , Hugh John , " interrupted Sweetheart , 
 in very Die Vernonish voice . 

  " Well , when I called you-- ' Thinggummy ' --_you
 know_--you hit me with a stick and the mark lasted
 three days ! " 

  " And served you right ! " said Sweetheart , calmly . 

  " Well , I ' m not saying it didn ' t , am I ? " retorted
 honest Hugh John ,  " but anyway _you_ needn ' t go
 about doing _wooly-woo_--

  " ' My nest it is harried , 
 My children all gone ! ' " 

  " Oh , you are a boy and can ' t understand--or
 won ' t ! " said Sweetheart , with a sigh ,  " I needn ' t
 have expected it . But Diana Vernon did make me cry , 
 especially the bit about her being a
 Catholic--stop--I will find it ! " 

 And she foraged among the books on the shelf for
 the big Abbotsford edition of _Rob Roy_ , the one
 with the fine old-fashioned pictures . 

  " Here it is , " she said with her finger on the
 place . 

  " ' I belong to an oppressed sect and antiquated
 religion  ( she read ) , and instead of getting credit
 for my devotion , as is due to all other good girls , 
 my kind friend Justice Inglewood might send me to
 the house of correction for it .  .  .  . I am by
 nature of a frank and unreserved disposition , --a
 plain , true-hearted girl , who would willingly act
 honestly and openly by all the world , and yet fate
 has entangled me in such a series of nets and
 toils and entanglements , that I dare not speak a
 word for fear of consequences , not to myself but to
 others . ' " 

 Sweetheart sighed again and repeated thoughtfully , 
  " I _am_ sorry for Die Vernon ! " 

  " Humph , " said Hugh John , with dogged masculine
 logic ,  " girls are always making up troubles , I
 think . I don ' t see what she has to  ' whimp ' 
 about--everybody did just as she said at that
 Hall--more than I would do for any silly girl , I
 bet ! Just you try it on , only once , Miss
 Sweetheart , that ' s all ! She has all she can eat and
 can order it herself--lots of horses and riding--a
 gun--cricky , I only wish I had her chances ! Think
 of it--just oblige me by thinking of it--secret
 passages to come and go by , night and day , right
 plumb in the wall under your nose , mysterious
 priests , Jesuits , Jacobites , and things . Why , it ' s
 nearly as good as Crusoe ' s Island , I declare . " 

 Sweetheart looked at Hugh John with the far-away
 gentle compassion which always drove that
 matter-of-fact warrior wild . 

  " All girls are the same , " he asserted insultingly , 
  " they always get thinking they are going to die
 right off , if only their little finger aches ! " 

  " You ' ll be sorry ! " said Sweetheart , warningly . 

  " Oh , will I ? " said Hugh John , truculently ,  " isn ' t
 what I say true , Toady Lion ? " 

 But Toady Lion was sitting upon a buffet , in the
 character of Morris upon his portmanteau . He was
 shaking and chattering with such exaggerated terror
 that Maid Margaret , wrapped in a dust-sheet for a
 disguise and armed with the kitchen poker , could
 not rob him for very laughter . So neither of them
 paid any heed . 

  " You ' ll be sorry for speaking like that about Die
 Vernon , " Sweetheart went on;  " I ' ve looked and I
 know . She was a true heroine . And she is worth a
 whole pack of your heroes any day . " 

  " And , indeed , that ' s not saying much ! " said Hugh
 John , who also had his sorrows .  " But at any rate
 that was no proper place to break off a story . And
 I ' ll tell father so . Let ' s tease to have some more . 
 It ' s a wet day , and we can ' t do anything else ! " 

  " Oh , yes--let ' s ! " said Sweetheart .  " Stop all that , 
 Toady Lion , and you , Maid Margaret . We are going to
 ask for the second tale from _Rob Roy ! _ " 

  " Well , " grumbled Hugh John ,  " I hope that there will
 be more about Rob Roy in it this time . It ' s not too
 soon . " 

 And Sweetheart only continued to regard him with
 the same quiet but irritating smile , and nodded
 her head as who would say ,  " Those who live the
 longest see the most ! " 

