 THE children lay prone on the floor of the library
 in various positions of juvenile comfort , watching
 the firewood in the big wide grate sparkle and
 crackle , or the broad snowflakes  " spat " against the
 window-panes , where they stuck awhile as if gummed , 
 and then began reluctantly to trickle down . As Sir
 Toady Lion said ,  " It was certainly a nice day on
 which to stop IN ! " 

 The choice of the book from which to tell the next
 Red Cap Tale had been a work of some difficulty . 
 Hugh John had demanded _Ivanhoe_ , chiefly because
 there was a chapter in it about shooting with the
 bow , the which he had read in his school reader
 when he ought to have been preparing his Latin . Sir
 Toady wanted _The Fortunes of Nigel_ , because the
 title sounded adventurous . Sweetheart , who has been
 sometimes to the play , was insistent for _The Bride
 of Lammermoor_ , while as to Maid Margaret , she was
 indifferent , so long as it was  " nice and eecitin ' . " 

 But the tale-teller , being in the position of the
 Man-with-the-Purse  ( or in that of the House of
 Commons with regard to the granting of supplies ) , 
 held to it that , in spite of its  " growed-up " title , 
 _The Antiquary_ would be the most suitable . First , 
 because we had agreed to go right through the
 Scottish stories; secondly , because _The Antiquary_
 was one of the first which Sir Walter wrote; and
 thirdly and lastly , because he , the tale-teller
 aforesaid ,  " felt like it . " 

 At this , I saw Hugh John look at his brother with
 the quick glance of intelligence which children
 exchange when they encounter the Superior Force . 

 That unspoken message said clearly and neatly , 
  " Pretty thing asking us to select the book , when he
 had it all settled from the start ! " 

 Nevertheless , I made no remark , but with my eyes on
 the click of Sweetheart ' s knitting needles  ( for in
 the intervals of nursery wars Sweetheart grows a
 diligent housewife ) , I began in the restful silence
 of that snowy Saturday my first tale from _The
 Antiquary_ . 


I . THE MYSTERIOUS MR . LOVEL

As though all the tin pots on a tinker ' s wagon had been jolted and
jangled , the bells of St . Giles ' s steeple in Edinburgh town , had just
told the hour of noon . It was the time for the Queensferry diligence
 ( which is to say , omnibus ) to set out for the passage of the Firth , if
it were to catch the tide of that day , and connect with the boat which
sets passengers from the capital upon the shores of Fife . 

A young man had been waiting some time . An old one had just bustled up . 
 " Deil ' s in it ! " cried the latter , with a glance at the dial of the
church clock ,  " I am late , after all ! " 

But the young man , saluting , informed him that , instead of being late , 
he was early--so far , that is , as the coach was concerned . It had not
yet appeared upon the stand . This information first relieved the mind of
the old gentleman , and then , after a moment or two , began  ( no difficult
matter ) to arouse his anger . 

 " Good woman ! good woman ! " he cried down one of the area stairs , common
in the old town of Edinburgh . Then he added in a lower tone ,  " Doited old
hag ! she ' s deaf as a post . I say , Mrs . Macleuchar ! " 

But Mrs . Macleuchar , the proprietress of the Queensferry diligence , was
in no hurry to face the wrath of the public . She served her customer
quietly in the shop below , ascended the stairs , and when at last on the
level of the street , she looked about , wiped her spectacles as if a mote
upon them might have caused her to overlook so minute an object as an
omnibus , and exclaimed ,  " Did ever anybody see the like o ' this ? " 

 " Yes , you abominable woman , " cried the traveller ,  " many have seen the
like before , and all will yet see the like again , that have aught to do
with your trolloping sex ! " 

And walking up and down the pavement in front of Mrs . Macleuchar ' s
booth , he delivered a volley of abuse each time he came in front of it , 
much as a battleship fires a broadside as she passes a hostile fortress , 
till the good woman was quite overwhelmed . 

 " Oh ! man ! man ! " she cried ,  " take back your three shillings and make me
quit o ' ye ! " 

 " Not so fast--not so fast , " her enemy went on;  " will three shillings
take me to Queensferry according to your deceitful programme ? Or will it
pay my charges there , if , by your fault , I should be compelled to tarry
there a day for want of tide ? Will it even hire me a pinnace , for which
the regular price is five shillings ? " 

But at that very moment the carriage lumbered up , and the two travellers
were carried off , the elder of them still leaning out of the window and
shouting reproaches at the erring Mrs . Macleuchar . 

The slow pace of the broken-down horses , and the need to replace a shoe
at a wayside smithy , still further delayed the progress of the vehicle , 
and when they arrived at Queensferry , the elder traveller , Mr . Jonathan
Oldbuck by name , saw at once , by the expanse of wet sand and the number
of the black glistening rocks visible along the shore , that the time of
tide was long past . 

But he was less angry than his young companion , Mr . Lovel , had been led
to expect from the scolding he had bestowed upon Mrs . Macleuchar in the
city . On the way the two had discovered a kindred taste for antique
literature and the remains of the past , upon which last Mr . Jonathan
Oldbuck was willing to discourse , as the saying is , till all was blue . 

The Hawes Inn sat  ( and still sits ) close by the wash of the tides which
scour the Firth of Forth on its southern side . It was then an
old-fashioned hostelry , overgrown on one side with ivy , and with the
woods of Barnbogle growing close down behind it . The host was very
willing to provide dinner and shelter for the two guests , and , indeed , 
there was a suspicion that Mr . Mackitchinson of the Hawes was in league
with Mrs . Macleuchar of the Tron , and that this fact went far to explain
the frequent late appearance of the coach with  " the three yellow wheels
and a black one " belonging to that lady , upon the High Street of
Edinburgh . 

At the Hawes Inn , therefore , the time of waiting before dinner was
sufficient for young Mr . Lovel to step out and discover who his amusing
and irascible companion of voyage might be . At South Queensferry every
one knew Mr . Oldbuck of Monkbarns . Bred a lawyer , he had never
practised , being ever more interested in the antiquities of his native
country than in sitting in an office among legal documents and quill
pens . The death of his brother had made him heir to all his father ' s
property , and in due time he had settled comfortably down to country
life and Roman inscriptions at the family seat of Monkbarns , near by to
the town of Fairport , the very town to which Mr . Lovel was at that
moment making his way . 

Mr . Oldbuck , though equally anxious , was unable to discover anything
about his travelling companion . He had , however , discussed the elder
dramatists with him , and found him so strong in the subject , that his
mind , always searching for the reasons of things , promptly set the young
man down as an actor travelling to Fairport , to fulfil an engagement at
the theatre there . 

 " Yes , " he said to himself ,  " Lovel and Belville--these are just the names
which youngsters are apt to assume on such occasions--on my life I am
sorry for the lad ! " 

It was this thought which made Mr . Oldbuck , though naturally and of
habit very careful of his sixpences , slip round to the back of the Hawes
Inn and settle the bill with the landlord . It was this which made him
propose to pay two-thirds of the post-chaise which was to carry them
across to Fairport , when at last they set foot on the northern side of
the Firth . Arrived at their destination , Mr . Oldbuck recommended Lovel
to the care of a decent widow , and so left him with many friendly
expressions , in order to proceed to his own house of Monkbarns . 

But no Mr . Lovel appeared on the boards of the theatre at Fairport . On
the contrary , not even the town gossips , who , having no business of
their own to attend to , take charge of other people ' s , could find out
anything about him . Furthermore they could say no evil . The Sheriff
called upon him , but the stranger had evidently fully satisfied the man
of law , for on his return home he sent him an invitation to dinner , 
which was , however , civilly declined . He paid his bills and meddled with
no one . All which being reported , more or less faithfully , to the
proprietor of Monkbarns , caused the young man to rise in his estimation , 
as one who had too much good sense to trouble himself with the  " bodies " 
of Fairport . 

It was five days before Lovel made his way out to the House of Monkbarns
to pay his respects . The mansion had once on a time been the storehouse
of the vanished Abbey . There the monks had stored the meal which the
people dwelling on their lands brought to them instead of rent . Lovel
found it a rambling , hither-and-thither old house , with tall hedges of
yew all about it . These last were cut into arm-chairs , crowing cocks , 
and St . Georges in the act of slaying many dragons , all green and
terrible . But one great yew had been left untouched by the shears , and
under it Lovel found his late fellow-traveller sitting , spectacles on
nose , reading the _London Chronicle_ . 

The old gentleman immediately rose to welcome his guest , and having
taken him indoors , he guided him with some difficulty to the  " den , " as
he called his study . Here Mr . Oldbuck found his niece in company with a
serving-maid , both in the midst of a thick cloud of dust , endeavouring
to reduce the place to some order and cleanliness . 

The Antiquary instantly exploded , as is the manner of all book-lovers
when their  " things " are disarranged . 

 " How dare you , or Jenny either , presume to meddle with my private
affairs ? Go sew your sampler , you monkey , and do not let me find you
here again as you value your ears-- " 

 " Why , uncle , " said the girl , who still stood her ground ,  " your room was
not fit to be seen , and I just came to see that Jenny laid everything
down where she took it up . " 

In the midst of a second discharge of great guns the young lady made her
escape , with a half-humorous courtesy to Lovel . It was , indeed , some
time before the young man could see , through the dense clouds of dust
 ( which , as the Antiquary said , had been ancient and peaceful enough only
an hour ago ) the chamber of Mr . Oldbuck , full of great books , littered
with ancient maps , engravings , scraps of parchment , old armour , 
broadswords , and Highland targets . 

In the midst of all crouched a huge black cat , glaring steadily with
great yellow eyes out of the murky confusion , like the familiar spirit
of this wizard ' s den . 

So , after showing Lovel many of his most valuable antiquities , and in
especial his treasured books , Mr . Oldbuck gladly led the way into the
open air . He would take his visitor , he said , to the Kaim of Kinprunes . 
It was on his own land , he affirmed , and not very far away . Arrived at a
little barren eminence , the Antiquary demanded of his friend what he
saw . 

 " A very fine view ! " said Lovel , promptly . 

But this was not the response for which the proud owner was waiting . He
went on to ask Lovel if he did not see anything remarkable on the
surface of the ground . 

 " Why , yes , " said Lovel , readily ,  " I do see something like a ditch , 
indistinctly marked . " 

At this , however , the Antiquary was most indignant . 

 " Indistinct ! " he cried ,  " why , the indistinctness must be in your own
eyes . It was clear even to that light-headed lassie , my niece , at the
first glance . Here on this very Kaim of Kinprunes was fought out the
final conflict between Agricola and the Caledonians ! The record
says--let me remind you-- ' in sight of the Grampian Hills . ' Yonder they
are ! _In conspectu classis_ , -- ' in sight of the fleet , ' --and where will
you find a finer bay than that on your right hand ? From this very
fortification , doubtless , Agrippa looked down on the immense army of
Caledonians occupying the slopes of the opposite hill , the infantry
rising rank over rank , the cavalry and charioteers scouring the more
level space below . From this very _prætorium_-- " 

But a voice from behind interrupted the Antiquary ' s poetic description , 
for his voice had mounted almost into a kind of ecstasy . 

 " _Prætorian here--Prætorian there--I mind the bigging o ' t ! _ " 

Both at once turned round , Lovel surprised , and the Antiquary both
surprised and angry . An old man in a huge slouched hat , a long white
grizzled beard , weather-beaten features of the colour of brick-dust , a
long blue gown with a pewter badge on the right arm , stood gazing at
them . In short , it was Edie Ochiltree , the King ' s Blue-Gownsman , which
is to say , privileged beggar . 

 " What is that ye say , Edie ? " demanded Oldbuck , thinking that his ears
must have deceived him . 

 " About this bit bower , Monkbarns , " said the undaunted Edie ,  " I mind the
biggin '  ( building ) o ' it ! " 

 " The deil ye do ! " said the Antiquary with scorn in his voice;  " why , you
old fool , it was here before ye were born , and will be here after ye are
hanged . " 

 " Hanged or drowned , alive or dead , " said Edie , sticking to his guns ,  " I
mind the biggin ' o ' t ! " 

 " You--you--you , " stammered the Antiquary , between confusion and anger , 
 " you strolling old vagabond , what ken ye about it ? " 

 " Oh , I ken just this about it , Monkbarns , " he answered ,  " and what profit
have I in telling ye a lie ? It was just some mason-lads and me , with
maybe two or three herds , that set to work and built this bit thing here
that ye call the prætorian , to be a shelter for us in a sore time
of rain , at auld Aiken Drum ' s bridal . And look ye , Monkbarns , dig down , 
and ye will find a stone  ( if ye have not found it already ) with the
shape of a spoon and the letters A . D . L . L . on it--that is to say Aiken
Drum ' s Lang Ladle . " 

The Antiquary blushed crimson with anger and mortification . For indoors
he had just been showing that identical stone to Lovel as his chiefest
treasure , and had interpreted the ladle as a Roman sacrificing vessel , 
and the letters upon it as a grave Latin inscription , carved by Agrippa
himself to celebrate his victory . 

Lovel was inclined to be amused by the old beggar ' s demolishing of all
the Antiquary ' s learned theories , but he was speedily brought to himself
by Edie Ochiltree ' s next words . 

 " That young gentleman , too , I can see , thinks little o ' an auld carle
like me , yet I ' ll wager I could tell him where he was last night in the
gloaming , only maybe he would not like to have it spoken of in company ! " 

It was now Lovel ' s turn to blush , which he did with the vivid crimson of
two-and-twenty . 

 " Never mind the old rogue , " said Mr . Oldbuck ,  " and don ' t think that I
think any the worse of you for your profession . They are only prejudiced
fools and coxcombs who do that . " 

For , in spite of Lovel ' s interest in ancient history , it still remained
in the Antiquary ' s mind that his young friend must be an actor by
profession . 

But to this Lovel paid no attention . He was engaged in making sure of
Edie ' s silence by the simple method of passing a crown-piece out of his
own pocket into the Blue-Gown ' s hand; while Monkbarns , equally willing
to bridle his tongue as to the building of the prætorian , was
sending him down to the mansion house for something to eat and a bottle
of ale thereto . 

 * * * * *


II . THE NIGHT OF STORM

The Antiquary continued to hear good reports of his young friend , and , 
as it struck him that the lad must be lonely in such a place as
Fairport , he resolved to ask Lovel to dinner , in order to show him the
best society in the neighbourhood--that is to say , his friend , Sir
Arthur Wardour of Knockwinnock , and his daughter Isabella . 

Sir Arthur was something of an antiquary also , but far less learned and
serious than Mr . Oldbuck . Living so near each other the two quarrelled
often about the Pictish Kings of Scotland , the character of Queen Mary , 
and even other matters more modern--such as the lending of various sums
of money . For Sir Arthur always wanted to borrow , whereas the Antiquary
did not always want to lend . Sir Arthur was entirely careless as to
paying back , while Mr . Oldbuck stood firmly rooted upon the rights of
principal and interest . But on the whole they were good friends enough , 
and the Baronet accordingly accepted , in a letter written by his
daughter , the invitation to Monkbarns . 

Lovel arrived punctually on the afternoon appointed , for , in the
Antiquary ' s day , dinners took place at four o ' clock ! It was a brooding , 
thundery day , sultry and threatening--the 17th of July , according to the
calendar . 

Mr . Oldbuck had time to introduce his  " most discreet sister Griselda " as
he called her , who came arrayed in all the finery of half a century
before , and wearing a mysterious erection on her head , something between
a wedding-cake and the Tower of Babel in a picture Bible , while his
niece , Miss MacIntyre , a pretty young woman with something of bright wit
about her , which came undoubtedly from her uncle ' s family , was arrayed
more in the fashion of the day . 

Sir Arthur , with his daughter on his arm , presently arrived , and
respects , compliments , and introductions were interchanged . The dinner
was made up chiefly of Scottish national dainties , and everything went
well , save that the solan goose , a fragrant bird at all times , proved so
underdone that Mr . Oldbuck threatened to fling it at the head of the
housekeeper . 

As soon as the ladies left the dining room , Sir Arthur and the Antiquary
plunged into their controversies , with a bottle of good port wine
between them , while Lovel set himself to listen with much amusement . 

The language of the Picts , the building of the earliest Edinburgh
Castle , with other subjects , on none of which they agreed , made the two
wiseacres grow hotter and hotter , till at last the wrath of the man of
pedigree was roused by a chance statement of the Antiquary ' s that the
Baronet ' s famous ancestor , Gamelyn de Guardover , who had signed the
Ragman Roll , showed thereby a mean example of submitting to Edward of
England . 

 " It is enough , sir , " said Sir Arthur , starting up fiercely .  " I shall
hereafter take care how I honour with my company one who shows himself
so ungrateful for my condescension . " 

 " In that you will do as you find most agreeable , Sir Arthur , " returned
the Antiquary .  " I hope that , as I was not aware of the full extent of
the obligation you had done me by visiting my poor house , I may be
excused for not having carried my gratitude to the extent of
servility . " 

 " Mighty well--mighty well , Mr . Oldbuck--I wish you a good evening , 
Mr . --ah--ah--Shovel--I wish you a very good evening . " 

And so saying Sir Arthur flounced out , and with long strides traversed
the labyrinth of passages , seeking for the drawing-room of Monkbarns . 

 " Did you ever see such a tup-headed old ass ? " said the Antiquary ,  " but I
must not let him burst in on the ladies in this mad way either . " 

So Mr . Oldbuck ran after his adversary , who was in great danger of
tumbling down the back stairs and breaking his shins over various
collections of learned and domestic rubbish piled in dark corners . 

 " Stay a minute , Sir Arthur , " said the Antiquary , at last capturing him
by the arm;  " don ' t be quite so hasty , my good old friend ! I _was_ a
little rude to you about Sir Gamelyn--why , he is an old acquaintance of
mine--kept company with Wallace and Bruce , and only subscribed the
Ragman Roll with the just intention of circumventing the Southern-- ' twas
right Scottish craft--hundreds did it ! Come , come--forget and
forgive--confess we have given the young fellow here a right to think us
two testy old fools . " 

 " Speak for yourself , Mr . Jonathan Oldbuck , " said Sir Arthur , with much
majesty . 

 " Awell--awell , " said the Antiquary , with a sigh ,  " a wilful man must have
his way ! " 

And the Baronet accordingly stalked into the drawing-room , pettishly
refused to accept either tea or coffee , tucked his daughter under his
arm , and , having said the driest of good-byes to the company at large , 
off he marched . 

 " I think Sir Arthur has got the black dog on his back again ! " said Miss
Oldbuck . 

 " Black dog ! Black deil ! " cried her brother;  " he ' s more absurd than
womankind . What say you , Lovel ? Why , the lad ' s gone too . " 

 " Yes , " said Miss MacIntyre ,  " he took his leave while Miss Wardour was
putting on her things . " 

 " Deil ' s in the people ! " cried the Antiquary .  " This is all one gets by
fussing and bustling , and putting one ' s self out of the way to give
dinners . O Seged , Emperor of Ethiopia , " he added , taking a cup of tea in
one hand and a volume of the _Rambler_ in the other ,  " well hast thou
spoken . No man can presume to say ,  ' This shall be a day of happiness . ' " 

Oldbuck had continued his studies for the best part of an hour , when
Caxton , the ancient barber of Fairport , thrusting his head into the
room , informed the company--first , that it was going to be  " an awfu ' 
nicht , " secondly , that Sir Arthur and Miss Wardour had started out to
return to Knockwinnock Castle _by way of the sands ! _

Instantly Miss MacIntyre set off to bear the tidings to Saunders
Mucklebackit , the old fisherman , while the Antiquary himself , with a
handkerchief tied round his hat and wig to keep them from being blown
away , searched the cliffs for any signs of his late guests . 

Nor was the information brought by Caxton one whit exaggerated . Sir
Arthur and his daughter had indeed started out to reach their home by
the sands . On most occasions these afforded a safe road enough , but in
times of high tide or when the sea was driven shoreward by a wind , the
waves broke high against the cliffs in fury . 

Talking earnestly together as they walked , Sir Arthur and Miss Wardour
did not observe the gathering of the tempest till it had broken upon
them . They had reached a deep sickle-shaped bay , and having with
difficulty passed one headland , they were looking with some anxiety
toward the other , hoping to reach and pass it before the tide closed in
upon them , when they saw a tall figure advancing toward them waving
hands and arms . Their hearts rejoiced , for , they thought , where that man
had passed , there would still be a road for them . 

But they were doomed to be disappointed . The figure was no other than
that of the old Blue-Gown Edie Ochiltree . As he advanced he continued to
sign to them and to shout words which were carried away by the blast , 
till he had arrived quite close . 

 " Turn back ! Turn back ! " he cried , when at last they could hear .  " Why did
you not turn back when I waved to you ? " 

 " We thought , " said Sir Arthur , much disturbed ,  " that we could still get
round Halket Head . " 

 " Halket Head ! " cried the vagrant;  " why , the tide will be running on
Halket Head by this time like the Falls of Foyers . It was all I could
do to get round it twenty minutes since . " 

It was now equally impossible to turn back . The water was dashing over
the skerries behind them , and the path by which Miss Wardour and her
father had passed so recently was now only a confusion of boiling and
eddying foam . 

There was nothing for it but to try to climb as far up the cliffs as
possible , and trust that the tide would turn back before it reached
them . With the help of the old beggar , they perched themselves upon the
highest shelf to which , on that almost perpendicular wall of rock , they
could hope to attain . But , nevertheless , as the waves leaped white
beneath , it seemed very far indeed from safety . 

Sir Arthur , struck with terror , offered lands and wealth to the
Blue-Gownsman if he would only guide them to a place of safety . 

But the old beggar could only shake his head and answer sadly :  " I was a
bold enough cragsman once . Many a kittywake ' s and seagull ' s nest have I
taken on these very cliffs above us . But now my eyesight and my footstep
and my handgrip all have failed this many and many a day ! But what is
that ? " he cried , looking eagerly upward .  " His Name be praised ! Yonder
comes some one down the cliff , even now . " 

And taking heart of grace , he cried directions up through the gathering
darkness to the unseen helper who was descending toward them . 

 " Right ! Right ! Fasten the rope well round the Crummie ' s Horn--that ' s the
muckle black stone yonder . Cast two plies about it ! That ' s it ! Now creep
a little eastwards , to that other stone--the Cat ' s Lug , they call it . 
There used to be the root of an old oak tree there . Canny now ! Take
time ! Now ye maun get to Bessie ' s Apron--that ' s the big , blue , flat
stone beneath ye ! And then , with your help and the rope , I ' ll win at ye , 
and we will be able to get up the young lady and Sir Arthur ! " 

The daring adventurer , no other than Lovel himself , soon reached the
place pointed out , and , throwing down the rope , it was caught by Edie
Ochiltree , who ascended to the flat blue stone formerly spoken of . From
this point of vantage the two of them were able by their united strength
to raise Miss Wardour to safety . Then Lovel descended alone , and
fastening the rope about Sir Arthur  ( who was now utterly unable , from
fear and cold , to do anything for himself ) , they soon had him beside
them on Bessie ' s Apron . 

Yet , even so , it seemed impossible that they could remain there all
night . The wind and the dashing spray every moment threatened to sweep
them from the narrow ledge they had reached . Besides , how was one so
delicate as Miss Wardour to stand out such a night ? Lovel offered , in
spite of the gathering darkness , once more to climb the cliff , and to
seek further assistance . But the old Blue-Gown withheld him . 

No cragsman in broadest daylight could do such a thing , he asserted . 
Even he himself , in the fullest of his strength , would never have
attempted the feat . It was death to ascend ten yards . Miss Wardour
begged that neither of them should try . She was already much better , she
said . Besides , their presence was needed to control her father , who was
clearly not responsible for his actions . 

Just then a faint halloo came from high above . Edie answered it with a
shout , waving at the same time Miss Wardour ' s handkerchief at the end of
his long beggar ' s staff , as far out from the cliff as possible . In a
little while the signals were so regularly replied to , that the forlorn
party on Bessie ' s Apron knew that they were again within hearing , if not
within reach , of friendly assistance . 

On the top of the cliffs Monkbarns was heading the party of searchers . 
Saunders Mucklebackit , an old fisherman and smuggler , had charge of the
rescue apparatus . This consisted of the mast of a boat , with a yard
firmly fixed across it . Through the ends of the yard a rope ran in two
blocks , and by this Saunders hoped to lower a chair down the cliffs , by
means of which  ( said the old smuggler ) the whole party would presently
be  " boused up and landed on board , as safe as so many kegs of brandy . " 

The chair was accordingly let down , together with a second rope--which , 
being held by some one below , would keep the chair from dashing about in
the wind against the rock . This Saunders called the  " guy " or guide rope . 

Miss Wardour , after some persuasion , mounted first , being carefully
bound in the rude seat by means of Lovel ' s handkerchief and neckcloth , 
in addition to the mendicant ' s broad leathern belt passed about her
waist . 

Sir Arthur , whose brain appeared quite dazed , continued loudly to
protest .  " What are you doing with my bairn ? " he cried .  " What are you
doing ? She shall not be separated from me . Isabel , stay with me--I
command you ! " 

But the signal being given to hoist away , the chair mounted , intently
watched by Lovel , who stood holding the guide rope , to the last flutter
of the lady ' s white dress . Miss Wardour was duly and safely landed . Sir
Arthur and Edie followed , and it remained for Lovel to make the more
hazardous final ascent . For now there was no one left below to help him
by holding the  " guy " rope . Nevertheless , being young and accustomed to
danger , he managed , though much banged and buffeted about by the wind , 
to fend himself off the rocks with the long pike-staff belonging to the
beggar , which Edie had left him for that purpose . 

It was only when Lovel reached the safety of the cliff that he felt
himself for a moment a little faint . When he came to himself Sir Arthur
had already been removed to his carriage , and all that Lovel saw of the
girl he had rescued from death was the last flutter of her dress
vanishing through the storm . 

 " She did not even think it worth while waiting to see whether I was dead
or alive--much less to thank me for anything I had done ! " 

And he resolved to leave Fairport on the morrow , without visiting
Knockwinnock , or again seeing Miss Wardour . But what he did not know was
that Miss Wardour had waited till she had been assured that Lovel was
safe and sound , having sent Sir Arthur on before her to the carriage . 

But as the young man was not aware that she had shown him even this
limited sympathy , his heart continued to be bitter within him . 

It was arranged that he was to sleep that night at Monkbarns . Indeed Mr . 
Oldbuck would hear of no other way of it . The Antiquary had looked
forward to the chicken pie and the bottle of port which Sir Arthur had
left untasted when he bounced off in a fume . What then was his wrath
when his sister , Miss Grizel , told him how that the minister of
Trotcosey , Mr . Blattergowl , having come down to Monkbarns to sympathise
with the peril of all concerned , had so much affected Miss Oldbuck by
his show of anxiety that she had set the pie and the wine before
him--which he had accordingly consumed to show his good-will . 

But after some very characteristic grumbling , cold beef and hard-boiled
eggs did just as well for the two friends , and while Lovel partook of
them , Miss Grizel entertained him with tales of the Green Room in which
he was to sleep . This apartment was haunted , it seemed , by the spirit of
the first Oldenbuck , the celebrated printer of the Augsburg Confession . 
He had even appeared in person to a certain town-clerk of Fairport , and
showed him  ( at the point of his toe ) upstairs to an old cabinet in which
was stored away the very document for the want of which the lairds of
Monkbarns were likely to be worsted in a famous lawsuit before the Court
of Session in Edinburgh . Furthermore , a famous German professor , a very
learned man , Dr . Heavysterne by name , had found his rest so much
disturbed in that very room that he could never again be persuaded to
sleep there . 

Lovel , however , laughed at such fears , and was accordingly shown by the
Antiquary up to the famous Green Room , a large chamber with walls
covered by a tapestry of hunting scenes , --stags , boars , hounds , and
huntsmen , all mixed together under the greenwood tree , the boughs of
which , interlacing above , gave its name to the room . 

Lovel fell asleep after a while , still bitterly meditating on how
unkindly Miss Wardour had used him , and his thoughts , mixed with the
perilous adventures of the evening , made him not a little feverish . At
first his dreams were wild , confused , and impossible . He flew like a
bird . He swam like a fish . He was upborne on clouds , and dashed on rocks
which yet received him soft as pillows of down . But at last , out of the
gloom a figure approached his bedside , separating himself from the wild
race of the huntsmen upon the green tapestry , --a figure like that which
had been described to him as belonging to the first laird of Monkbarns . 
He was dressed in antique Flemish garb , a furred Burgomaster cap was on
his head , and he held in his hands a black volume with clasps of brass . 

Lovel strove to speak , but , as usual in such cases , he could not utter a
word . His tongue refused its office . The awful figure held up a warning
finger , and then began deliberately to unclasp the volume he held in his
hands . He turned the leaves hastily for a few minutes; then , holding the
book aloft in his left hand , he pointed with his right to a line which
seemed to start forth from the page glowing with supernatural fire . 
Lovel did not understand the language in which the book was printed , but
the wonderful light with which the words glowed impressed them somehow
on his memory . The vision shut the volume . A strain of music was heard , 
and Lovel awoke . The sun was shining full into the Green Room , and
somewhere not far away a girl ' s voice was singing a simple Scottish air . 


INTERLUDE OF WARNING

 It was the spinner of yarns himself who broke the
 silence which fell on the party at the close of the
 first tale told out of the treasure-house of _The
 Antiquary_ . 

  " If I catch you , " were the words of warning which
 fell from his lips ,  " you , Hugh John , or you , Toady
 Lion , trying to hoist one another up a cliff with a
 rope and a chair--well , the rope will most
 certainly be used for quite another purpose , and
 both of you will just hate to look at a chair for a
 fortnight after ! Do you understand ? " 

 They understood perfectly . 

  " It was me they were going to hoist , " confided Maid
 Margaret , coming a little closer .  " I saw them
 looking at me all the time you were telling the
 story ! " 

  " Well , " I said ,  " just let me catch them at it , 
 that ' s all ! " 

 This caution being necessary for the avoidance of
 future trouble , I went on to read aloud the whole
 of the Storm chapters , to the children ' s
 unspeakable delight . Hugh John even begged for the
 book to take to bed with him , which privilege he
 was allowed , on the solemn promise that he would
 not  " peep on ahead . " Since Sweetheart ' s prophecies
 as to Die Vernon , such conduct has been voted
 scoundrelly and unworthy of any good citizen of the
 nursery . 

 On the whole , however , I could not make out
 whether _The Antiquary_ promised to be a favourite
 or not . The storm scene was declared  " famous , " but
 the accompanying prohibition to break their own or
 their family ' s necks , by pulling chairs up and down
 rocks , somewhat damped the ardour of the usual
 enthusiasts . 

 As , however , the day was hopeless outside , the snow
 beating more and more fiercely on the windows , and
 hanging in heavy fleecy masses on the smallest
 twigs of the tree-branches and leafless rose stems , 
 it was decided that nothing better could be
 imagined , than just to proceed with our second tale
 from _The Antiquary_ . But before beginning I
 received two requests , somewhat difficult to
 harmonize the one with the other . 

  " Tell us all about Miss Wardour and Lovel . He ' s
 nice ! " said Sweetheart . 

  " Skip ALL the love-making ! " cried Hugh John and Sir
 Toady in a breath . 

 * * * * *


