I . THE EARL ' S SECRET

ON the seashore not far from the mansion-house of Monkbarns stood the
little fisherman ' s cottage of Saunders Mucklebackit . Saunders it was who
had rigged the mast , by which Sir Arthur and his daughter were pulled to
the top of the cliffs on the night of the storm . His wife came every day
to the door of Monkbarns to sell fish to Miss Griselda , the Antiquary ' s
sister , when the pair of them would stand by the hour  " skirling and
flyting beneath his window like so many seamaws , " as Oldbuck himself
said . 

Besides Steenie Mucklebackit , the eldest son , the same who had assisted
Edie Ochiltree to bestow a well-deserved chastisement upon
Dousterswivel , and a number of merry half-naked urchins , the family
included the grandmother , Elspeth Mucklebackit--a woman old , but not
infirm , whose understanding appeared at most times to be asleep , but the
stony terror of whose countenance often frightened the bairns more than
their mother ' s shrill tongue and ready palm . 

Elspeth seldom spoke . Indeed , she had done little for many years except
twirl the distaff in her corner by the fire . Few cared to have much to
do with her . She was thought to be  " far from canny , " and certainly she
knew more about the great family of Glenallan than it was safe to speak
aloud . 

It chanced on the very night when Edie and Steenie had given a skinful
of sore bones to the German impostor Dousterswivel , that the Countess of
Glenallan , mother of the Earl , was brought to be buried at midnight
among the ruins of St . Ruth . 

Such had been the custom of the family from ancient times--indeed , ever
since the Great Earl fell fighting at the Red Harlaw against Donald of
the Isles . More recently there had been another reason for such a
strange fashion of burial . For the family were Catholics , and there had
long been laws in Scotland against the holding of popish ceremonials
even on an occasion so solemn . 

The news of the death of her ancient mistress , coming at last to the
ears of old Elspeth , took such hold upon her , that she could not rest
till she had sent off Edie Ochiltree to the Earl of Glenallan , at
Glenallan House , with a ring for a token and the message that Elspeth of
the Craigburnfoot must see him before she died . She had , Edie was to
say , a secret on her soul , without revealing which she could not hope to
die in peace . 

Accordingly Edie set off for the castle of Glenallan , taking the ring
with him , but with very little hope of finding his way into the Earl ' s
presence; for Lord Glenallan had been long completely withdrawn from the
world . His mother was Countess in her own right , and so long as she
lived , her son had been wholly dependent upon her . In addition to which
some great sorrow or some great crime , the countryside was not sure
which , pressed sore upon his mind , and being a strict Catholic he passed
his time in penance and prayer . 

However , by the help of an old soldier , one Francie Macraw , who had been
his rear-rank man at Fontenoy , Edie Ochiltree was able after many delays
to win a way to the Earl ' s presence--though the priests who were about
his person evidently tried to keep everything connected with the outer
world from his knowledge . The Earl , a tall , haggard , gloomy man , whose
age seemed twice what it really was , stood holding the token ring in his
hand . At first he took Edie for a father of his own church , and demanded
if any further penance were necessary to atone for his sin . But as soon
as Edie declared his message , at the very first mention of the name of
Elspeth of the Craigburnfoot , the Earl ' s cheek became even more
deathlike than it had been at Edie ' s entrance . 

 " Ah , " he said ,  " that name is indeed written on the darkest page of a
terrible history . But what can the woman want with me ? Is she dead or
living ? " 

 " She is living in the body , " said Edie ,  " and at times her mind lives
too--but she is an awfu ' woman . " 

 " She always was so , " said the Earl , answering almost unconsciously .  " She
was different from other women--likest , perhaps , to her who is no
more-- " 

Edie knew that he meant his own mother , so lately dead . 

 " She wishes to see me , " continued the Earl;  " she shall be gratified , 
though the meeting will be a pleasure to neither of us . " 

Lord Glenallan gave Edie a handful of guineas , which , contrary to his
usage , Edie had not the courage to refuse . The Earl ' s tone was too
absolute . 

Then , as an intimation that the interview was at an end , Lord Glenallan
called his servant . 

 " See this old man safe , " he said;  " let no one ask him any questions . And
you , my friend , be gone , and forget the road that leads to my house ! " 

 " That would indeed be difficult , " said the undaunted Edie ,  " since your
lordship has given me such good cause to remember it . " 

Lord Glenallan stared , as if hardly comprehending the old man ' s boldness
in daring to bandy words with him . Then , without answering , he made him
another signal to depart by a simple movement of his hand , which Edie , 
awed far beyond his wont , instantly obeyed . 


II . THE MOTHER ' S VENGEANCE

The day of Lord Glenallan ' s visit to the cottage where dwelt old Elspeth
of the Craigburnfoot seemed at first ill timed . That very day Steenie
Mucklebackit , the young , the gallant , the handsome eldest son of the
house had been carried to his grave . He had been drowned while at the
fishing , though his father had risked his life in vain to save him . The
family had now returned home , and were sitting alone in the first
benumbing shock of their grief . 

It was some time before the Earl could make good his entrance into the
cottage . It was still longer before he could convince the old woman
Elspeth that he was really Lord Glenallan , and so obtain an opportunity
of speaking with her . But at last they were left alone in the cottage , 
and the thick veil which had fallen upon Elspeth ' s spirit seemed for a
while to be drawn aside . She spoke like one of an education far superior
to her position , clearly and calmly , even when recounting the most
terrible events . 

Her very first words recalled to the Earl the fair young wife , whom he
had married long ago , against his mother ' s will and without her
knowledge . 

 " Name not her name , " he cried , in agony ,  " all that is dead to me--dead
long ago ! " 

 " I MUST ! " said the old woman;  " it is of her I have to speak . " 

And in the fewest and simplest words she told him how , when his mother
the Countess had found means to separate husband and wife , while he
himself was fleeing half mad , none knew whither , the young wife had
thrown herself in a fit of frenzy over the cliffs into the sea . It was
to Elspeth ' s cottage that she and her babe had been brought . 

 " And here , " said the terrible old woman , suddenly thrusting a golden
bodkin into his hand ,  " is the very dagger which your mother the Countess
gave me in order that with it I might slay your infant son . " 

The Earl looked at the gold bodkin or dagger , as if in fancy he saw the
blood of his child still red upon it . 

 " Wretch ! " he cried;  " and had you the heart ? " 

 " I kenna whether I would or not , " said Elspeth .  " My mistress commanded
and I obeyed . So did I ever . But my obedience was not to be tried that
time . For when I returned , the babe had gone . Your younger brother had
been called up to the castle . The child had been left in the care of the
Countess ' s Spanish maid , and when I returned to my cottage , both she and
the babe were gone . The dead body of your young wife alone remained . And
now , " concluded Elspeth , abruptly ,  " can you forgive me ? " 

Lord Glenallan was going out of the hut , overwhelmed by the disclosure
to which he had been listening . He saw his young wife hounded to death
by his fierce and revengeful mother . He thought of the living child so
wonderfully left to him as a legacy from the dead . Yet he turned at
Elspeth ' s last words . 

 " May God forgive thee , miserable woman , " he said .  " Turn for mercy to
Him . He will forgive you as sincerely as I do . " 

As Lord Glenallan went out into the sunlight , he met face to face with
the Antiquary himself , who was on his way to the cottage to offer what
consolation or help might be in his power . The Earl and he recognised
one another , but the Antiquary ' s greeting was hard and cold . As a
magistrate he had made , on his own responsibility and against all the
power of the Glenallan family , the legal inquiries into the death of the
Earl ' s young wife . Indeed , during a residence which she had made at
Knockwinnock Castle with the Wardour family twenty years ago , and while
she was still only known as Miss Eveline Neville , the Antiquary had
loved her and had asked her to be his wife . It was , indeed , chiefly on
her account that he had never married . Mr . Oldbuck had never ceased to
mourn her , and now , believing as he had good reason to do , that the Earl
was the cause of her untimely death , and of the stigma which rested upon
her name , it was little wonder that he should wish to have no dealings
with him . 

But the Earl had a great need in his heart to speak to some one . In a
moment the whole world seemed to have changed for him . For the first
time he knew the truth about a dark deed of cruelty . For the first time , 
also , he knew that he had a son . He desired above all else the wise
counsel of a true friend . In his heart he had admired the fearlessness
of the Antiquary in the bold inquiry he had made at the time of Eveline
Neville ' s death , and now , refusing to be rebuffed , he followed Mr . 
Oldbuck as he was turning away , and demanded that he should not deny him
his counsel and assistance at a most terrible and critical moment . 

It was not in the good Antiquary ' s nature to refuse such a request from
Earl or beggar , and their interview ended in the Earl ' s accepting the
hospitality of Monkbarns for the night , in order that they might have
plenty of time to discuss the whole subject of Elspeth ' s communication . 

On his own part Mr . Oldbuck had some comfort to give Lord Glenallan . He
had kept the papers which concerned the inquiry carefully , and he was
able to assure his lordship that his brother had carried off the babe
with him , probably for the purpose of having it brought up and educated
upon the English estates he had inherited from his father , and on which
he had ever afterward lived . 

 " My brother , " said Lord Glenallan ,  " is recently dead , which makes our
search the more difficult . Furthermore , I am not his heir . He has left
his property to a stranger , as indeed he had every right to do . But as
the heir is like himself a Protestant , he may be unwilling to aid the
inquiry-- " 

 " I trust , " interrupted Mr . Oldbuck , with some feeling ,  " that you will
find a Protestant can be as honest and honourable as a Catholic . " 

The Earl protested that he had no idea of supposing otherwise . 

 " Only , " he continued ,  " there was an old steward on the estate who in all
probability is the only man now living who knows the truth . But it is
not expected that any man will willingly disinherit himself . For if I
have a living son , my father ' s estates are entailed on him , and the
steward may very likely stand by his master . " 

 " I have a friend in Yorkshire , " said Mr . Oldbuck ,  " to whom I can apply
for information as to the character of your brother ' s heir , and also as
to the disposition of his steward . That is all we can do at present . But
take courage , my lord . I believe that your son is alive . " 

In the morning Lord Glenallan returned to the castle in his carriage , 
while Mr . Oldbuck , hearing from Hector that he was going down to
Fairport , in order to see that old Edie Ochiltree had fair play before
the magistrates , offered to bear him company . 

Edie Ochiltree--in prison for thwacking the ribs of Dousterswivel , which
he had done  ( or at least poor Steenie Mucklebackit for him ) , and for
stealing the German ' s fifty pounds , which he had not done--willingly
revealed to Monkbarns what he had refused to breathe to Bailie
Littlejohn of the Fairport magistracy . After some delay Edie was
accordingly liberated on the Antiquary ' s bail , and immediately
accompanied his good friend to the cottage of old Elspeth Mucklebackit , 
where , by the Earl ' s request , Oldbuck was to take down a statement from
her lips , such as might be produced in a court of law . But no single
syllable would the old beldame now utter against her ancient mistress . 

 " Ha , " she said , at the first question put to her by the Antiquary;  " I
thought it would come to this . It ' s only sitting silent when they
question me . There ' s nae torture in our days , and if there was , let them
rend me ! It ill becomes a vassal ' s mouth to betray the bread which it
has eaten . " 

Then they told her that her mistress , the Countess Jocelin , was dead , 
hoping this might bring her to confession . But the news had quite an
opposite effect . 

 " Dead ! " cried Elspeth , aroused as ever by the sound of her mistress ' s
name ,  " then , if she be gone before , the servant must follow . All must
ride when she is in the saddle . Bring my scarf and hood ! Ye wadna hae me
gang in the carriage with my lady , and my hair all abroad in this
fashion ! " 

She raised her withered arms , and her hands seemed busied like those of
a woman who puts on a cloak to go a journey . 

 " Call Miss Neville , " she continued;  " what do you mean by Lady Geraldin ? 
I said Eveline Neville . There ' s no Lady Geraldin . But tell her to change
her wet gown and not to look so pale . Bairn--what should she do wi ' a
bairn ? She has nane , I trow ! Teresa--Teresa--my lady calls us ! Bring a
candle ! The grand staircase is as black before me as a Yule midnight ! 
Coming , my lady , we are coming ! " 

With these words , and as if following in the train of her mistress , old
Elspeth , once of the Craigburnfoot , sunk back on the settle , and from
thence sidelong to the floor . 


III . THE HEIR OF GLENALLAN

Meanwhile doom was coming fast upon poor Sir Arthur Wardour . He seemed
to be utterly ruined . The treachery of Dousterswivel , the pressing and
extortionate demands of a firm called Goldiebirds , who held a claim over
his estate , the time-serving of his own lawyers , at last brought the
officers of the law down upon him . He found himself arrested for debt in
his own house . He was about to be sent to prison , when Edie Ochiltree , 
who in his day had been deep in many plots , begged that he might be
allowed to drive over to Tannanburgh , and promised that he would
certainly bring back some good news from the post-office there . 

It was all that Oldbuck , with his best tact and wisdom , could do to keep
Hector MacIntyre from assaulting the officers of the law during the
absence of Edie . Two long hours they waited . The carriage had already
been ordered round to the door to convey Sir Arthur to prison . Miss
Wardour was in agony , her father desperate with shame and grief , when
Edie arrived triumphantly grasping a packet . He delivered it forthwith
to the Antiquary . For Sir Arthur , knowing his own weakness , had put
himself unreservedly into the hands of his abler friend . The packet , 
being opened , was found to contain a writ stopping the proceedings , a
letter of apology from the lawyers who had been most troublesome , and a
note from Captain Wardour , Sir Arthur ' s son , enclosing a thousand pounds
for his father ' s immediate needs . It also declared that ere long he
himself would come to the castle along with a distinguished officer , 
Major Neville , who had been appointed to report to the War Office
concerning the state of the defences of the country . 

 " Thus , " said the Antiquary , summing up the situation ,  " was the last
siege of Knockwinnock House laid by Saunders Sweepclean , the bailiff , 
and raised by Edie Ochiltree , the King ' s Blue-Gown ! " 

There was , at the time when the story of the Antiquary and his doings
draws to a close , a daily expectation of a French invasion . Beacons had
been prepared on every hill and headland , and men were set to watch . One
of these beacons had been intrusted to old Caxon the hairdresser , and
one night he saw , directly in the line of the hill to the south which he
was to watch , a flame start suddenly up . It was undoubtedly the token
agreed upon to warn the country of the landing of the French . 

He lighted his beacon accordingly . It threw up to the sky a long
wavering train of light , startling the sea-fowl from their nests , and
reddening the sea beneath the cliffs . Caxon ' s brother warders , equally
zealous , caught and repeated the signal . The district was soon awake and
alive with the tidings of invasion . 

From far and near the Lowland burghers , the country lairds , the Highland
chiefs and clans responded to the summons . They had been drilling for
long , and now in the dead of the night they marched with speed upon
Fairport , eager to defend that point of probable attack . 

Last of all the Earl of Glenallan came in with a splendidly mounted
squadron of horse , raised among his Lowland tenants , and five hundred
Highland clansmen with their pipes playing stormily in the van . 
Presently also Captain Wardour arrived in a carriage drawn by four
horses , bringing with him Major Neville , the distinguished officer
appointed to the command of the district . The magistrates assembled at
the door of their town-house to receive him . The volunteers , the
yeomanry , the Glenallan clansmen--all were there awaiting the great man . 

What was the astonishment of the people of Fairport , and especially of
the Antiquary , to see descend from the open door of the carriage , --who
but the quiet Mr . Lovel . 

He had brought with him the news that the alarm of invasion was false . 
The beacon which Caxon had seen was only the burning of the mining
machinery in Glen Withershins which had been ordered by Oldbuck and Sir
Arthur to make a final end of Dousterswivel ' s plots and deceits . 

But there was yet further and more interesting private news . The proofs
that Lovel was indeed the son of the Earl of Glenallan were found to be
overwhelming . His heirship to the title had been fully made out . The
chaplain who had performed his father ' s wedding had returned from
abroad , exiled by the French Revolution . The witnesses also had been
found . Most decisive of all , among the papers of the Earl ' s late
brother , there was discovered a duly authenticated account of his
carrying off the child , and of how he had had him educated and pushed on
in the army . 

So that very night the Antiquary enjoyed in some degree the crowning
pleasure of his whole life , in bringing together father and son for the
first time . That is , if the marriage which took place soon after between
his young friend Lovel  ( or Lord William Geraldin ) and Miss Isabella
Wardour of Knockwinnock Castle did not turn out to be a yet greater
pleasure . Old Edie still travels from farm to farm , but mostly now
confines himself to the short round between Monkbarns and Knockwinnock . 
It is reported , however , that he means soon to settle with old Caxon , 
who , since the marriage of his daughter to Lieutenant Taffril , has been
given a cottage near the three wigs which he still keeps in order in the
parish , --the minister ' s , Sir Arthur ' s , and best of all , that of our good
and well-beloved Antiquary . 


THE END OF THE LAST TALE FROM  " THE ANTIQUARY . " 

 * * * * *


  " Now , " said Sweetheart , nodding particular
 approval ,  " that is the way a story ought to end
 up--everything going on from chapter to chapter , 
 with no roundabouts , and everything told about
 everybody right to the very end ! " 

  " Hum , " said Hugh John , with a curl of his nose;
  " well , that ' s done with ! But it was good about the
 Storm and the Duel ! The rest was-- " 

  " Hush , " said Sweetheart ,  " remember , it was written
 by Sir Walter . " 

  " Sir , " said I to Hugh John , heavily parental , 
  " _The Antiquary_ may not now be much to your
 taste , but the day will come when you may probably
 prefer it to all the rest put together . " 

 At these words the young man assumed the expression
 common to boys who are bound to receive the
 wholesome advice of their elders , yet who do so
 with silent but respectful doubt , if not with
 actual disbelief . 

  " Well , " he said , after a long pause ,  " anyway , the
 Duel _was_ good . And I ' d jolly well like to find a
 treasure in Misticot ' s grave . Can we have another
 snow fight ? " 
﻿


CHAPTER I

PERSEUS

Once upon a time there were two princes who were twins . Their names
were Acrisius and Proetus , and they lived in the pleasant vale of
Argos , far away in Hellas . They had fruitful meadows and vineyards , 
sheep and oxen , great herds of horses feeding down in Lerna Fen , and
all that men could need to make them blest : and yet they were
wretched , because they were jealous of each other . From the moment
they were born they began to quarrel; and when they grew up each
tried to take away the other ' s share of the kingdom , and keep all
for himself . 

But there came a prophet to Acrisius and prophesied against him , and
said ,  " Because you have risen up against your own blood , your own
blood shall rise up against you; because you have sinned against
your kindred , by your kindred you shall be punished . Your daughter
Danae shall have a son , and by that son ' s hands you shall die . So
the gods have ordained , and it will surely come to pass . " 

And at that Acrisius was very much afraid; but he did not mend his
ways . He had been cruel to his own family , and , instead of repenting
and being kind to them , he went on to be more cruel than ever : for
he shut up his fair daughter Danae in a cavern underground , lined
with brass , that no one might come near her . So he fancied himself
more cunning than the gods : but you will see presently whether he
was able to escape them . 

Now it came to pass that in time a son came to Danae : so beautiful a
babe that any but King Acrisius would have had pity on it . But he
had no pity; for he took Danae and her babe down to the seashore , 
and put them into a great chest and thrust them out to sea , for the
winds and the waves to carry them whithersoever they would . 

The northwest wind blew freshly out of the blue mountains , and down
the pleasant vale of Argos , and away and out to sea . And away and
out to sea before it floated the mother and her babe , while all who
watched them wept , save that cruel father , King Acrisius . 

So they floated on and on , and the chest danced up and down upon the
billows , and the baby slept upon its mother ' s breast : but the poor
mother could not sleep , but watched and wept , and she sang to her
baby as they floated; and the song which she sang you shall learn
yourselves some day . 

And now they are past the last blue headland , and in the open sea;
and there is nothing round them but the waves , and the sky , and the
wind . But the waves are gentle , and the sky is clear , and the breeze
is tender and low . 

So a night passed , and a day , and a long day it was for Danae; and
another night and day beside , till Danae was faint with hunger and
weeping , and yet no land appeared . And all the while the babe slept
quietly; and at last poor Danae drooped her head and fell asleep
likewise with her cheek against the babe ' s . 

After a while she was awakened suddenly; for the chest was jarring
and grinding , and the air was full of sound . She looked up , and over
her head were mighty cliffs , all red in the setting sun , and around
her rocks and breakers , and flying flakes of foam . She clasped her
hands together , and shrieked aloud for help . And when she cried , 
help met her : for now there came over the rocks a tall and stately
man , and looked down wonderingly upon poor Danae tossing about in
the chest among the waves . 

He wore a rough cloak of frieze , and on his head a broad hat to
shade his face; in his hand he carried a trident for spearing fish , 
and over his shoulder was a casting-net; but Danae could see that he
was no common man by his stature , and his walk , and his flowing
golden hair and beard; and by the two servants who came behind him , 
carrying baskets for his fish . But she had hardly time to look at
him before he had laid aside his trident and leapt down the rocks , 
and thrown his casting-net so surely over Danae and the chest , that
he drew it , and her , and the baby , safe upon a ledge of rock . 

Then the fisherman took Danae by the hand , and lifted her out of the
chest , and said : 

 " O beautiful damsel , what strange chance has brought you to this
island in so frail a ship ? Who are you , and whence ? Surely you are
some King ' s daughter and this boy has somewhat more than mortal . " 

And as he spoke he pointed to the babe; for its face shone like the
morning star . 

But Danae only held down her head , and sobbed out : 

 " Tell me to what land I have come , unhappy that I am; and among what
men I have fallen ! " 

And he said ,  " This isle is called Seriphos , and I am a Hellen , and
dwell in it . I am the brother of Polydectes the King; and men call
me Dictys the netter , because I catch the fish of the shore . " 

Then Danae fell down at his feet , and embraced his knees and cried : 

 " Oh , sir , have pity upon a stranger , whom a cruel doom has driven to
your land; and let me live in your house as a servant; but treat me
honourably , for I was once a king ' s daughter , and this my boy  ( as
you have truly said ) is of no common race . I will not be a charge to
you , or eat the bread of idleness; for I am more skilful in weaving
and embroidery than all the maidens of my land . " 

And she was going on; but Dictys stopped her , and raised her up , and
said : 

 " My daughter , I am old , and my hairs are growing grey; while I have
no children to make my home cheerful . Come with me then , and you
shall be a daughter to me and to my wife , and this babe shall be our
grandchild . For I fear the gods , and show hospitality to all
strangers; knowing that good deeds , like evil ones , always return to
those who do them . " 

So Danae was comforted , and went home with Dictys the good
fisherman , and was a daughter to him and to his wife . 

Fifteen years were passed and gone and the babe was now grown to a
tall lad and a sailor , and went many voyages after merchandise to
the islands round . His mother called him Perseus; but all the people
in Seriphos said that he was not the son of mortal man , and called
him Zeus , the son of the king of the Immortals . For though he was
but fifteen , he was taller by a head than any man in the island; and
he was the most skilful of all in running and wrestling and boxing , 
and in throwing the quoit and the javelin , and in rowing with the
oar , and in playing on the harp , and in all which befits a man . And
he was brave and truthful , gentle and courteous , for good old Dictys
had trained him well; and well it was for Perseus that he had done
so . 

Now one day at Samos , while the ship was lading , Perseus wandered
into a pleasant wood to get out of the sun , and sat down on the turf
and fell asleep . And as he slept a strange dream came to him--the
strangest dream which he had ever had in his life . 

There came a lady to him through the wood , taller than he , or any
mortal man; but beautiful exceedingly , with grey eyes , clear and
piercing , but strangely soft and mild . On her head was a helmet , and
in her hand a spear . And over her shoulder , above her long blue
robes , hung a goat-skin , which bore up a mighty shield of brass , 
polished like a mirror . She stood and looked at him with her clear
grey eyes; and Perseus saw that her eyelids never moved , nor her
eyeballs , but looked straight through and through him , and into his
very heart , as if she could see all the secrets of his soul , and
knew all that he had ever thought or longed for since the day that
he was born . And Perseus dropped his eyes , trembling and blushing , 
as the wonderful lady spoke . 

 " Perseus , you must do an errand for me . " 

 " Who are you , lady ? And how do you know my name ? " 

 " I am Pallas Athene; and I know the thoughts of all men ' s hearts , 
and discern their manhood or their baseness . And from the souls of
clay I turn away , and they are blest , but not by me . They fatten at
ease , like sheep in the pasture , and eat what they did not sow , like
oxen in the stall . They grow and spread , like the gourd along the
ground; but , like the gourd , they give no shade to the traveller , 
and when they are ripe death gathers them , and they go down unloved
into hell , and their name vanishes out of the land . 

 " But to the souls of fire I give more fire , and to those who are
manful I give a might more than man ' s . These are the heroes , the
sons of the Immortals who are blest , but not like the souls of clay . 
For I drive them forth by strange paths , Perseus , that they may
fight the Titans and the monsters , the enemies of gods and men . 
Through doubt and need , danger and battle , I drive them; and some of
them are slain in the flower of youth , no man knows when or where;
and some of them win noble names , and a fair and green old age; but
what will be their latter end I know not , and none , save Zeus , the
father of gods and men . Tell me now , Perseus , which of these two
sorts of men seem to you more blest ? " 

Then Perseus answered boldly :  " Better to die in the flower of youth , 
on the chance of winning a noble name , than to live at ease like the
sheep , and die unloved and unrenowned . " 

Then that strange lady laughed , and held up her brazen shield , and
cried :  " See here , Perseus; dare you face such a monster as this , and
slay it , that I may place its head upon this shield ? " 

And in the mirror of the shield there appeared a face and as Perseus
looked on it his blood ran cold . It was the face of a beautiful
woman; but her cheeks were pale as death , and her brows were knit
with everlasting pain , and her lips were thin and bitter like a
snake ' s; and , instead of hair , vipers wreathed about her temples , 
and shot out their forked tongues; while round her head were folded
wings like an eagle ' s , and upon her bosom claws of brass . 

And Perseus looked awhile , and then said :  " If there is anything so
fierce and foul on earth , it were a noble deed to kill it . Where can
I find the monster ? " 

Then the strange lady smiled again , and said :  " Not yet; you are too
young , and too unskilled; for this is Medusa the Gorgon , the mother
of a monstrous brood . " 

And Perseus said ,  " Try me; for since you spoke to me a new soul has
come into my breast , and I should be ashamed not to dare anything
which I can do . Show me , then , how I can do this ! " 

 " Perseus , " said Athene ,  " think well before you attempt; for this
deed requires a seven years ' journey , in which you cannot repent or
turn back nor escape; but if your heart fails you , you must die in
the Unshapen Land , where no man will ever find your bones . " 

 " Better so than live despised , " said Perseus .  " Tell me , then , oh
tell me , fair and wise Goddess , how I can do but this one thing , and
then , if need be , die ! " 

Then Athene smiled and said : 

 " Be patient , and listen; for if you forget my words , you will indeed
die . You must go northward to the country of the Hyperboreans , who
live beyond the pole , at the sources of the cold north wind , till
you find the three Grey Sisters , who have but one eye and one tooth
between them . You must ask them the way to the Nymphs , the daughters
of the Evening Star , who dance about the golden tree , in the
Atlantic island of the west . They will tell you the way to the
Gorgon , that you may slay her , my enemy , the mother of monstrous
beasts . Once she was a maiden as beautiful as morn , till in her
pride she sinned a sin at which the sun hid his face; and from that
day her hair was turned to vipers , and her hands to eagle ' s claws;
and her heart was filled with shame and rage , and her lips with
bitter venom; and her eyes became so terrible that whosover looks on
them is turned to stone; and her children are the winged horse and
the giant of the golden sword; and her grandchildren are Echidna the
witch-adder , and Geryon the three-headed tyrant , who feeds his herds
beside the herds of hell . So she became the sister of the Gorgons , 
the daughters of the Queen of the Sea . Touch them not , for they are
immortal; but bring me only Medusa ' s head . " 

 " And I will bring it ! " said Perseus;  " but how am I to escape her
eyes ? Will she not freeze me too into stone ? " 

 " You shall take this polished shield , " said Athene ,  " and when you
come near her look not at her yourself , but at her image in the
brass; so you may strike her safely . And when you have struck off
her head , wrap it , with your face turned away , in the folds of the
goatskin on which the shield hangs . So you will bring it safely back
to me , and win to yourself renown , and a place among the heroes who
feast with the Immortals upon the peak where no winds blow . " 

Then Perseus said ,  " I will go , though I die in going . But how shall
I cross the seas without a ship ? And who will show me my way ? And
when I find her , how shall I slay her , if her scales be iron and
brass ? " 

Now beside Athene appeared a young man more light-limbed than the
stag , whose eyes were like sparks of fire . By his side was a
scimitar of diamond , all of one clear precious stone , and on his
feet were golden sandals , from the heels of which grew living wings . 

Then the young man spoke :  " These sandals of mine will bear you
across the seas , and over hill and dale like a bird , as they bear me
all day long; for I am Hermes , the far-famed Argus-slayer , the
messenger of the Immortals who dwell on Olympus . " 

Then Perseus fell down and worshipped , while the young man spoke
again : 

 " The sandals themselves will guide you on the road , for they are
divine and cannot stray; and this sword itself the Argus-slayer , 
will kill her , for it is divine , and needs no second stroke . Arise , 
and gird them on , and go forth . " 

So Perseus arose , and girded on the sandals and the sword . 

And Athene cried ,  " Now leap from the cliff and be gone . " 

But Perseus lingered . 

 " May I not bid farewell to my mother and to Dictys ? And may I not
offer burnt offerings to you , and to Hermes the far-famed Argus-
slayer , and to Father Zeus above ? " 

 " You shall not bid farewell to your mother , lest your heart relent
at her weeping . I will comfort her and Dictys until you return in
peace . Nor shall you offer burnt offerings to the Olympians; for
your offering shall be Medusa ' s head . Leap , and trust in the armour
of the Immortals . " 

Then Perseus looked down the cliff and shuddered; but he was ashamed
to show his dread . Then he thought of Medusa and the renown before
him , and he leapt into the empty air . 

And behold , instead of falling he floated , and stood , and ran along
the sky . He looked back , but Athene had vanished , and Hermes; and
the sandals led him on northward ever , like a crane who follows the
spring toward the Ister fens . 

So Perseus started on his journey , going dry-shod over land and sea;
and his heart was high and joyful , for the winged sandals bore him
each day a seven days ' journey . And he turned neither to the right
hand nor the left , till he came to the Unshapen Land , and the place
which has no name . 

And seven days he walked through it on a path which few can tell , 
till he came to the edge of the everlasting night , where the air was
full of feathers , and the soil was hard with ice; and there at last
he found the three Grey Sisters , by the shore of the freezing sea , 
nodding upon a white log of driftwood , beneath the cold white winter
moon; and they chanted a low song together ,  " Why the old times were
better than the new . " 

There was no living thing around them , not a fly , not a moss upon
the rocks . Neither seal nor sea gull dare come near , lest the ice
should clutch them in its claws . The surge broke up in foam , but it
fell again in flakes of snow; and it frosted the hair of the three
Grey Sisters , and the bones in the ice cliff above their heads . They
passed the eye from one to the other , but for all that they could
not see; and they passed the tooth from one to the other , but for
all that they could not eat; and they sat in the full glare of the
moon , but they were none the warmer for her beams . And Perseus
pitied the three Grey Sisters; but they did not pity themselves . 

So he said ,  " Oh , venerable mothers , wisdom is the daughter of old
age . You therefore should know many things . Tell me , if you can , the
path to the Gorgon . " 

Then one cried ,  " Who is this who reproaches us with old age ? " And
another ,  " This is the voice of one of the children of men . " 

Then one cried ,  " Give me the eye , that I may see him " ; and another , 
 " Give me the tooth , that I may bite him . " But Perseus , when he saw
that they were foolish and proud , and did not love the children of
men , left off pitying them . Then he stepped close to them , and
watched till they passed the eye from hand to hand . And as they
groped about between themselves , he held out his own hand gently , 
till one of them put the eye into it , fancying that it was the hand
of her sister . Then he sprang back , and laughed , and cried : 

 " Cruel and proud old women , I have your eye; and I will throw it
into the sea , unless you tell me the path to the Gorgon , and swear
to me that you tell me right . " 

Then they wept , and chattered , and scolded; but in vain . They were
forced to tell the truth , though , when they told it , Perseus could
hardly make out the road . 

 " You must go , " they said ,  " foolish boy , to the southward , into the
ugly glare of the sun , till you come to Atlas the Giant , who holds
the heaven and the earth apart . And you must ask his daughters , the
Hesperides , who are young and foolish like yourself . And now give us
back our eye , for we have forgotten all the rest . " 

So Perseus gave them back their eye . And he leaped away to the
southward , leaving the snow and the ice behind . And the terns and
the sea gulls swept laughing round his head , and called to him to
stop and play , and the dolphins gambolled up as he passed , and
offered to carry him on their back . And all night long the sea
nymphs sang sweetly . Day by day the sun rose higher and leaped more
swiftly into the sea at night , and more swiftly out of the sea at
dawn; while Perseus skimmed over the billows like a sea gull , and
his feet were never wetted; and leapt on from wave to wave , and his
limbs were never weary , till he saw far away a mighty mountain , all
rose-red in the setting sun . Perseus knew that it was Atlas , who
holds the heavens and the earth apart . 

He leapt on shore , and wandered upward , among pleasant valleys and
waterfalls . At last he heard sweet voices singing; and he guessed
that he was come to the garden of the Nymphs , the daughters of the
Evening Star . They sang like nightingales among the thickets , and
Perseus stopped to hear their song; but the words which they spoke
he could not understand . So he stepped forward and saw them dancing , 
hand in hand around the charmed tree , which bent under its golden
fruit; and round the tree foot was coiled the dragon , old Ladon the
sleepless snake , who lies there for ever , listening to the song of
the maidens , blinking and watching with dry bright eyes . 

Then Perseus stopped , not because he feared the dragon , but because
he was bashful before those fair maids; but when they saw him , they
too stopped , and called to him with trembling voices : 

 " Who are you , fair boy ? Come dance with us around the tree in the
garden which knows no winter , the home of the south wind and the
sun . Come hither and play with us awhile; we have danced alone here
for a thousand years , and our hearts are weary with longing for a
playfellow . " 

 " I cannot dance with you , fair maidens; for I must do the errand of
the Immortals . So tell me the way to the Gorgon , lest I wander and
perish in the waves . " 

Then they sighed and wept; and answered : 

 " The Gorgon ! she will freeze you into stone . " 

 " It is better to die like a hero than to live like an ox in a stall . 
The Immortals have lent me weapons , and they will give me wit to use
them . " 

Then they sighed again and answered :  " Fair boy , if you are bent on
your own ruin , be it so . We know not the way to the Gorgon; but we
will ask the giant Atlas above upon the mountain peak . " So they went
up the mountain to Atlas their uncle , and Perseus went up with them . 
And they found the giant kneeling , as he held the heavens and the
earth apart . 

They asked him , and he answered mildly , pointing to the sea board
with his mighty hand ,  " I can see the Gorgons lying on an island far
away , but this youth can never come near them , unless he has the hat
of darkness , which whosoever wears cannot be seen . " 

Then cried Perseus ,  " Where is that hat , that I may find it ? " 

But the giant smiled .  " No living mortal can find that hat , for it
lies in the depths of Hades , in the regions of the dead . But my
nieces are immortal , and they shall fetch it for you , if you will
promise me one thing and keep your faith . " 

Then Perseus promised; and the giant said ,  " When you come back with
the head of Medusa , you shall show me the beautiful horror , that I
may lose my feeling and my breathing , and become a stone for ever;
for it is weary labour for me to hold the heavens and the earth
apart . " 

Then Perseus promised , and the eldest of the Nymphs went down , and
into a dark cavern among the cliffs , out of which came smoke and
thunder , for it was one of the mouths of hell . 

And Perseus and the Nymphs sat down seven days and waited trembling , 
till the Nymph came up again; and her face was pale , and her eyes
dazzled with the light for she had been long in the dreary darkness;
but in her hand was the magic hat . 

Then all the Nymphs kissed Perseus , and wept over him a long while;
but he was only impatient to be gone . And at last they put the hat
upon his head , and he vanished out of their sight . 

But Perseus went on boldly , past many an ugly sight , far away into
the heart of the Unshapen Land , till he heard the rustle of the
Gorgons ' wings and saw the glitter of their brazen talons; and then
he knew that it was time to halt , lest Medusa should freeze him into
stone . 

He thought awhile with himself , and remembered Athene ' s words . He
arose aloft into the air , and held the mirror of the shield above
his head , and looked up into it that he might see all that was below
him . 

And he saw the three Gorgons sleeping . He knew that they could not
see him , because the hat of darkness hid him; and yet he trembled as
he sank down near them , so terrible were those brazen claws . 

Two of the Gorgons were foul as swine , and lay sleeping heavily , 
with their mighty wings outspread; but Medusa tossed to and fro
restlessly , and as she tossed Perseus pitied her . But as he looked , 
from among her tresses the vipers ' heads awoke , and peeped up with
their bright dry eyes , and showed their fangs , and hissed; and
Medusa , as she tossed , threw back her wings and showed her brazen
claws . 

Then Perseus came down and stepped to her boldly , and looked
steadfastly on his mirror , and struck with Herpe stoutly once; and
he did not need to strike again . 

Then he wrapped the head in the goat-skin , turning away his eyes , 
and sprang into the air aloft , faster than he ever sprang before . 

For Medusa ' s wings and talons rattled as she sank dead upon the
rocks; and her two foul sisters woke , and saw her lying dead . 

Into the air they sprang yelling , and looked for him who had done
the deed . They rushed , sweeping and flapping , like eagles after a
hare; and Perseus ' s blood ran cold as he saw them come howling on
his track; and he cried ,  " Bear me well now , brave sandals , for the
hounds of Death are at my heels ! " 

And well the brave sandals bore him , aloft through cloud and
sunshine , across the shoreless sea; and fast followed the hounds of
Death . But the sandals were too swift , even for Gorgons , and by
nightfall they were far behind , two black specks in the southern
sky , till the sun sank and he saw them no more . 

Then he came again to Atlas , and the garden of the Nymphs; and when
the giant heard him coming he groaned , and said ,  " Fulfil thy promise
to me . " Then Perseus held up to him the Gorgon ' s head , and he had
rest from all his toil; for he became a crag of stone , which sleeps
forever far above the clouds . 

Perseus thanked the Nymphs , and asked them ,  " By what road shall I go
homeward again , for I have wandered far in coming hither ? " 

And they wept and cried ,  " Go home no more , but stay and play with
us , the lonely maidens , who dwell for ever far away from gods and
men . " 

But he refused , and they told him his road . And he leapt down the
mountain , and went on , lessening and lessening like a sea gull , away
and out to sea . 

So Perseus flitted onward to the northeast , over many a league of
sea , till he came to the rolling sand hills and the dreary Lybian
shore . 

And he flitted on across the desert : over rock ledges , and banks of
shingle , and level wastes of sand , and shell drifts bleaching in the
sunshine , and the skeletons of great sea monsters , and dead bones of
ancient giants , strewn up and down upon the old sea floor . And as he
went the blood drops fell to the earth from the Gorgon ' s head , and
became poisonous asps and adders , which breed in the desert to this
day . 

Over the sands he went , till he saw the Dwarfs who fought with
cranes . Their spears were of reeds and rushes , and their houses of
the eggshells of the cranes; and Perseus laughed , and went his way
to the northeast , hoping all day long to see the blue Mediterranean
sparkling , that he might fly across it to his home . 

But now came down a mighty wind , and swept him back southward toward
the desert . All day long he strove against it; but even the winged
sandals could not prevail . So he was forced to float down the wind
all night; and when the morning dawned there was nothing but the
blinding sun in the blinding blue; and round him there was nothing
but the blinding sand . 

And Perseus said ,  " Surely I am not here without the will of the
Immortals , for Athene will not lie . Were not these sandals to lead
me in the right road ? Then the road in which I have tried to go must
be a wrong road . " 

Then suddenly his ears were opened , and he heard the sound of
running water . And at that his heart was lifted up , though he
scarcely dare believe his ears; and within a bowshot of him was a
glen in the sand , and marble rocks , and date trees , and a lawn of
gay green grass . And through the lawn a streamlet sparkled and
wandered out beyond the trees , and vanished in the sand . And Perseus
laughed for joy , and leapt down the cliff and drank of the cool
water , and ate of the dates , and slept upon the turf , and leapt up
and went forward . 

Then he towered in the air like an eagle , for his limbs were strong
again; and he flew all night across the mountain till the day began
to dawn , and rosy-fingered Eos came blushing up the sky . And then , 
behold , beneath him was the long green garden of Egypt and the
shining stream of Nile . 

And he saw cities walled up to heaven , and temples , and obelisks , 
and pyramids , and giant gods of stone . And he came down amid fields
of barley and flax , and millet , and clambering gourds; and saw the
people coming out of the gates of a great city , and setting to work , 
each in his place , among the water courses , parting the streams
among the plants cunningly with their feet , according to the wisdom
of the Egyptians . But when they saw him they all stopped their work , 
and gathered round him , and cried : 

 " Who art thou , fair youth ? and what Dearest thou beneath they goat--
skin there ? Surely thou art one of the Immortals; for thy skin is
white like ivory , and ours is red like clay . Thy hair is like
threads of gold , and ours is black and curled . Surely thou art one
of the Immortals " ; and they would have worshipped him then and
there; but Perseus said : 

 " I am not one of the Immortals; but I am a hero of the Hellens . And
I have slain the Gorgon in the wilderness , and bear her head with
me . Give me food , therefore , that I may go forward and finish my
work . " 

Then they gave him food , and fruit , but they would not let him go . 
And when the news came into the city that the Gorgon was slain , the
priests came out to meet him , and the maidens , with songs and
dances , and timbrels and harps; and they would have brought him to
their temple and to their King; but Perseus put on the hat of
darkness , and vanished away out of their sight . 

And Perseus flew along the shore above the sea; and he went on all
the day; and he went on all the night . 

And at the dawn of day he looked toward the cliffs; and at the
water ' s edge , under a black rock , he saw a white image stand . 

 " This , " thought he ,  " must surely be the statue of some sea god; I
will go near and see what kind of gods these barbarians worship . " 

But when he came near , it was no statue , but a maiden of flesh and
blood; for he could see her tresses streaming in the breeze; and as
he came closer still , he could see how she shrank and shivered when
the waves sprinkled her with cold salt spray . Her arms were spread
above her head , and fastened to the rock with chains of brass; and
her head drooped on her bosom , either with sleep , or weariness , or
grief . But now and then she looked up and wailed , and called her
mother; yet she did not see Perseus , for the cap of darkness was on
his head . 

Full of pity and indignation , Perseus drew near and looked upon the
maid . And , lifting the hat from his head , he flashed into her sight . 
She shrieked with terror , and tried to hide her face with her hair , 
for she could not with her hands; but Perseus cried : 

 " Do not fear me , fair one; I am a Hellen , and no barbarian . What
cruel men have bound you ? But first I will set you free . " 

And he tore at the fetters , but they were too strong for him; while
the maiden cried : 

 " Touch me not; I am accursed , devoted as a victim to the sea gods . 
They will slay you , if you dare to set me free . " 

 " Let them try , " said Perseus; and drawing Herpe from his thigh , he
cut through the brass as if it had been flax . 

 " Now , " he said ,  " you belong to me , and not to these sea gods , 
whosoever they may be ! " But she only called the more on her mother . 

 " Why call on your mother ? She can be no mother to have left you
here . " 

And she answered , weeping : 

 " I am the daughter of Cepheus , King of Iopa , and my mother is
Cassiopoeia of the beautiful tresses , and they called me Andromeda , 
as long as life was mine . And I stand bound here , hapless that I am , 
for the sea monster ' s food , to atone for my mother ' s sin . For she
boasted of me once that I was fairer than the Queen of the Fishes;
so she in her wrath sent the sea floods , and her brother the Fire
King sent the earthquakes , and wasted all the land , and after the
floods a monster bred of the slime what devours all living things . 
And now he must devour me , guiltless though I am--me who never
harmed a living thing , nor saw a fish upon the shore but I gave it
life , and threw it back into the sea; for in our land we eat no
fish , for fear of their queen . Yet the priests say that nothing but
my blood can atone for a sin which I never committed . " 

But Perseus laughed , and said ,  " A sea monster ? I have fought with
worse than him : I would have faced Immortals for your sake : how much
more a beast of the sea ? " 

Then Andromeda looked up at him , and new hope was kindled in her
breast , so proud and fair did he stand with one hand round her , and
in the other the glittering sword . But she only sighed , and wept the
more , and cried : 

 " Why will you die , young as you are ? Is there not death and sorrow
enough in the world already ? It is noble for me to die , that I may
save the lives of a whole people; but you , better than them all , why
should I slay you too ? Go you your way; I must go mine . " And then , 
suddenly looking up , she pointed to the sea , and shrieked : 

 " There he comes , with the sunrise , as they promised . I must die now . 
How shall I endure it ? Oh , go ! Is it not dreadful enough to be torn
piecemeal , without having you to look on ? " And she tried to thrust
him away . 

But he said :  " I go; yet promise me one thing ere I go : that if I
slay this beast you will be my wife , and come back with me to my
kingdom in fruitful Argos . Promise me , and seal it with a kiss . " 

Then she lifted up her face , and kissed him; and Perseus laughed for
joy , and flew upward , while Andromeda crouched trembling on the
rock . 

On came the great sea monster , coasting along like a huge black
galley . His great sides were fringed with clustering shells and
seaweeds , and the water gurgled in and out of his wide jaws . 

At last he saw Andromeda , and shot forward to take his prey , while
the waves foamed white behind him , and before him the fish fled
leaping . 

Then down from the height of the air fell Perseus like a shooting
star; down to the crests of the waves , while Andromeda hid her face
as he shouted; and then there was silence for a while . 

At last she looked up trembling , and saw Perseus springing toward
her; and instead of the monster a long black rock , with the sea
rippling quietly round it . 

Who then so proud as Perseus , as he leapt back to the rock , and
lifted his fair Andromeda in his arms , and flew with her to the
cliff top , as a falcon carries a dove ? 

Who so proud as Perseus , and who so joyful as all the AEthiop
people ? For they had stood watching the monster from the cliffs , 
wailing for the maiden ' s fate . And already a messenger had gone to
Cepheus and Cassiopoeia , where they sat in sackcloth and ashes on
the ground , in the innermost palace chambers , awaiting their
daughter ' s end . And they came , and all the city with them , to see
the wonder , with songs and with dances , with cymbals and harps , and
received their daughter back again , as one alive from the dead . 

Then Cepheus said ,  " Hero of the Hellens , stay here with me and be my
son-in-law , and I will give you the half of my kingdom . " 

 " I will be your son-in-law , " said Perseus ,  " but of your kingdom I
will have none , for I long after the pleasant land of Greece , and my
mother who waits for me at home . " 

Then Cepheus said ,  " You must not take my daughter away at once , for
she is to us like one alive from the dead . Stay with us here a year , 
and after that you shall return with honour . " And Perseus consented . 
So they went up to the palace; and when they came in , there stood in
the hall Phineus , the brother of Cepheus , chafing like a bear robbed
of her whelps , and with him his sons , and his servants , and many an
armed man , and he cried to Cepheus : 

 " You shall not marry your daughter to this stranger of whom no one
knows even the name . Was not Andromeda betrothed to my son ? And now
she is safe again , has he not a right to claim her ? " 

But Perseus laughed , and answered :  " If your son is in want of a
bride , let him save a maiden for himself . " 

Then he unveiled the Gorgon ' s head , and said ,  " This has delivered my
bride from one wild beast; it shall deliver her from many . " And as
he spoke Phineus and all his men-at-arms stopped short , and
stiffened each man as he stood; and before Perseus had drawn the
goat-skin over the face again , they were all turned into stone . Then
Perseus bade the people bring levers and roll them out . 

So they made a great wedding feast , which lasted seven whole days , 
and who so happy as Perseus and Andromeda ? 

And when a year was ended Perseus hired Phoenicians from Tyre , and
cut down cedars , and built himself a a noble galley; and painted its
cheeks with vermilion and pitched its sides with pitch; and in it he
put Andromeda , and all her dowry of jewels , and rich shawls , and
spices from the East; and great was the weeping when they rowed
away . But the remembrance of his brave deed was left behind; and
Andromeda ' s rock was shown at Iopa in Palestine till more than a
thousand years were past . 

So Perseus and the Phoenicians rowed to the westward , across the
sea , till they came to the pleasant Isles of Hellas , and Seriphos , 
his ancient home . 

Then he left his galley on the beach , and went up as of old; and he
embraced his mother , and Dictys his good foster-father , and they
wept over each other a long while , for it was seven years and more
since they had met . 

Then he went home to Argos , and reigned there well with fair
Andromeda . But the will of the gods was accomplished towards
Acrisius , his grandfather , for he died from the falling of a quoit
which Perseus had thrown in a game . 

Perseus and Andromeda had four sons and three daughters , and died in
a good old age . And when they died , the ancients say , Athene took
them up into the sky , with Cepheus and Cassiopoeia . And there on
starlight nights you may see them shining still; Cepheus with his
kingly crown , and Cassiopoeia in her ivory chair , plaiting her star-
spangled tresses , and Perseus with the Gorgon ' s head , and fair
Andromeda beside him , spreading her long white arms across the
heavens , as she stood when chained to the stone for the monster . All
night long they shine , for a beacon to wandering sailors; but all
day they feast with the gods , on the still blue peaks of Olympus . 


