We now come to the great King Alfred , the best and greatest of all
English Kings . We know quite enough of his history to be able to say
that he really deserves to be so called , though I must warn you
that , just because he left so great a name behind him , people have
been fond of attributing to him things which really belonged to
others . Thus you may sometimes see nearly all English laws and
customs attributed to Alfred , as if he had invented them all for
himself . You will sometimes hear that Alfred founded Trial by Jury , 
divided England into Counties , and did all kinds of other things . 
Now the real truth is that the roots and beginnings of most of these
things are very much older than the time of Alfred , while the
particular forms in which we have them now are very much later . But
people have a way of fancying that everything must have been
invented by some particular man , and as Alfred was more famous than
anybody else , they hit upon Alfred as the most likely person to have
invented them . 

But , putting aside fables , there is quite enough to show that there
have been very few Kings , and very few men of any sort , so great and
good as King Alfred . Perhaps the only equally good King we read of
is Saint Louis of France; and though he was quite as good , we cannot
set him down as being so great and wise as Alfred . Certainly no King
ever gave himself up more thoroughly than Alfred did fully to do the
duties of his office . His whole life seems to have been spent in
doing all that he could for the good of his people in every way . And
it is wonderful in how many ways his powers showed themselves . That
he was a brave warrior is in itself no particular praise in an age
when almost every man was the same . But it is a great thing for a
prince so large a part of whose time was spent in fighting to be
able to say that all his wars were waged to set free his country
from the most cruel enemies . 

And we may admire too the wonderful way in which he kept his mind
always straight and firm , never either giving way to bad luck or
being puffed up by good luck . We read of nothing like pride or
cruelty or injustice of any kind either towards his own people or
towards his enemies . And if he was a brave warrior , he was many
other things besides . He was a lawgiver; at least he collected and
arranged the laws , and caused them to be most carefully
administered . He was a scholar , and wrote and translated many books
for the good of his people . He encouraged trade and enterprise of
all kinds , and sent men to visit distant parts of the world , and
bring home accounts of what they saw . And he was a thoroughly good
man and a devout Christian in all relations of life . In short , one
hardly knows any other character in all history so perfect; there is
so much that is good in so many different ways; and though no doubt
Alfred had his faults like other people , yet he clearly had none , at
any rate in the greater part of his life , which took away at all
seriously from his general goodness . One wonders that such a man was
never canonized as a Saint; most certainly many people have received
that name who did not deserve it nearly so well as he did . 

Alfred , or , as his name should really be spelled , Aelfred , 
[ : That is , the rede or councel of the elves . A great many
Old-English names are called after the elves or fairies . ] was the
youngest son of King Aethelwulf , and was born at Wantage in
Berkshire in 849 . His mother was Osburh daughter of Oslac the King ' s
cup-bearer , who came of the royal house of the Jutes in Wight . Up to
the age of twelve years Alfred was fond of hunting and other sports
but he had not been taught any sort of learning , not so much as to
read his own tongue . But he loved the old English songs; and one day
his mother had a beautiful book of songs with rich pictures and fine
painted initial letters , such as you may often see in ancient books . 
And she said to her children ,  " I will give this beautiful book to
the one of you who shall first be able to read it . " And Alfred said , 
 " Mother , will you really give me the book when I have learned to
read it ? " And Osburh said ,  " Yes , my son . " So Alfred went and found a
master , and soon learned to read . Then he came to his mother , and
read the songs in the beautiful book and took the book for his own . 

In 868 , when he was in his twentieth year , while his brother
Aethelred was King , Alfred married . His wife ' s name was Ealhswyth;
she was the daughter of Aethelred called the Mickle or Big , Alderman
of the Gainas in Lincolnshire , and her mother Eadburh was of the
royal house of the Mercians . It is said that on the very day of his
marriage he was smitten with a strange disease , which for twenty
years never quite left him , and fits of which might come on at any
time . If this be true , it makes all the great things that he did
even more wonderful . 

Meanwhile the great Danish invasion had begun in the northern parts
of England . There are many stories told in the old Northern Songs as
to the cause of it . Some tell how Ragnar Lodbrog , a great hero of
these Northern tales , was seized by Aella , King of the
Northumbrians , and was thrown into a dungeon full of serpents , and
how , while he was dying of the bites of the serpents , he sang a
wonderful death-song , telling of all his old fights , and calling on
his sons to come and avenge him . The year 871 the Danes for the
first time entered Wessex . Nine great battles , besides smaller
skirmishes , were fought this year , in some of which the English won
and in others the Danes . One famous battle was at Ashdown , in
Berkshire . We are told that the heathen men were in two divisions;
one was commanded by their two Kings Bagsecg and Halfdene , and the
other by five Earls , Sidroc the Old , Sidroc the Young , Osbeorn , 
Fraena , and Harold . And King Aethelred was set against the Kings and
Alfred the Aetheling against the Earls . And the heathen men came on
against them . But King Aethelred heard mass in his tent . And men
said ,  " Come forth , O King , to the fight , for the heathen men press
hard upon us . " And King Aethelred said ,  " I will serve God first and
man after , so I will not come forth till all the words of the mass
be ended . " So King Aethelred abode praying , and the heathen men
fought against Alfred the Aetheling . And Alfred said ,  " I cannot
abide till the King my brother comes forth; I must either flee , or
fight alone with the heathen men . " So Alfred the Aetheling and his
men fought against the five Earls . Now the heathen men stood on the
higher ground and the Christians on the lower . Yet did Alfred go
forth trusting in God , and he made his men hold close together with
their shields , and they went forth like a wild boar against the
hounds . And they fought against the heathen men and smote them , and
slew the five Earls , Sidroc the Old , Sidroc the Young , Osbeorn , 
Fraena , and Harold . Then the mass was over , and King Aethelred came
forth and fought against the two Kings , and slew Bagsecg the King
with his own hand and smote the heathen men with a great slaughter
and chased them even unto Reading . 

In 871 , on Aethelred ' s death , Alfred became King of the West-Saxons
and Over-lord of all England , as his father had appointed so long
before with the consent of his Wise Men . 

The Danes did not come again into Wessex till 876 . But though the
West-Saxons had no fighting by land during these years , things were
not quite quiet , for in 875 King Alfred had a fight at sea against
some of the Danish pirates . This sea-fight is worth remembering as
being , I suppose , the first victory won by the Englishmen at sea , 
where Englishmen have since won so many victories . King Alfred then
fought against seven Danish ships , of which he took one and put the
rest to flight . It is somewhat strange that we do not hear more than
we do of warfare by sea in these times , especially when we remember
how in earlier times the Angles and Saxons had roved about in their
ships , very much as the Danes and other Northmen were doing now . It
would seem that the English , after they settled in Britain , almost
left off being a seafaring people . We find Alfred and other Kings
doing what they could to keep up a fleet and to stir up a naval
spirit among their people . And in some degree they did so; still we
do not find the English , for a long while after this time , doing
nearly so much by sea as they did by land . This was a pity; for
ships might then , as in later times , have been wooden walls . It is
much better to meet an enemy at sea , and to keep him from landing in
your country , than to let him land , even if you can beat him when he
has landed . 

But in 876 the Danes came again into Wessex; and we thus come to the
part of Alfred ' s life which is at once the saddest and the
brightest . It is the time when his luck was lowest and when his
spirit was highest . The army under Guthorm or Guthrum , the Danish
King of East-Anglia , came suddenly to Wareham in Dorsetshire . The
Chronicle says that they  " bestole " --that is , came secretly or
escaped--from the West-Saxon army , which seems to have been waiting
for them . This time Alfred made peace with the Danes , and they gave
him some of their chief men for hostages , and they swore to go out
of the land . They swore this on the holy bracelet , which was the
most solemn oath in use among the heathen Northmen , and on which
they had never before sworn at any of the times when they had made
peace with the English . But they did not keep their oath any better
for taking it in this more solemn way . The part of the host which
had horses  " bestole away . " King Alfred rode after the Danish horse
as far as Exeter , but he did not overtake them till they had got
there , and were safe in the stronghold . Then they made peace , 
swearing oaths , and giving as many hostages as the King asked for . 

And now we come to the terrible year 878 , the greatest and saddest
and most glorious in all Alfred ' s life . In the very beginning of the
year , just after Twelfth-night , the Danish host again came suddenly-
- " bestole " as the Chronicle says--to Chippenham . Then  " they rode
through the West-Saxons ' land , and there sat down , and mickle of the
folk over the sea they drove , and of the others the most deal they
rode over; all but the King Alfred; he with a little band hardly
fared [went] after the woods and on the moor-fastnesses . " This time
of utter distress lasted only a very little while , for in a few
months Alfred was again at the head of an army and able to fight
against the Danes . 

It was during this trouble that Alfred stayed in the hut of a
neatherd or swineherd of his , who knew who he was , though his wife
did not know him . One day the woman set some cakes to bake , and bade
the King , who was sitting by the fire mending his bow and arrows , to
tend them . Alfred thought more of his bow and arrows than he did of
the cakes , and let them burn . Then the woman ran in and cried out , 
 " There , don ' t you see the cakes on fire ? Then wherefore turn them
not ? You are glad enough to eat them when they are piping hot . " 

We are told that this swineherd or neatherd afterwards became Bishop
of Winchester . They say that his name was Denewulf , and that the
King saw that , though he was in so lowly a rank , he was naturally a
very wise man . So he had him taught , and at last gave him the
Bishoprick . 

I do not think that I can do better than tell you the next happening
to Alfred , as it is in the Chronicle , only changing those words
which you might not understand . 

 " And that ilk [same] winter was Iwer ' s and Healfdene ' s brother among
the West-Saxons in Devonshire; and him there men slew and eight
hundred men with him and forty men of his host . And there was the
banner taken which they the Raven hight [call] . And after this
Easter wrought King Alfred with his little band a work [fortress] at
Athelney , and out of that work was he striving with the [Danish]
host , and the army sold [gave] him hostages and mickle oaths , and
eke they promised him that their King should receive baptism . And
this they fulfilled . And three weeks after came King Guthrum with
thirty of the men that in the host were worthiest , at Aller , that is
near Athelney . And him the King received at his baptism , [ : 
That is , was his godfather . ] and his chrisom-loosing [ : That
is , he laid aside the chrisom or white garment which a newly
baptised person wore . ] was at Wedmore . And he was twelve nights with
the King , and he honoured him and his feres [companions] with mickle
fee [money] . " 

Thus you see how soon King Alfred ' s good luck came back to him
again . The Raven was a famous banner of the Danes , said to have been
worked by the daughters of Ragnar Lodbrog . It was thought to have
wonderful powers , so that they could tell by the way in which the
raven held his wings whether they would win or not in battle . 

You see the time of utter distress lasted only from soon after
Twelfth-night to Easter , and even during that time the taking of the
Raven must have cheered the English a good deal . After Easter things
began to mend , when Alfred built his fort at Athelney and began to
skirmish with the Danes , and seven weeks later came the great
victory at Ethandun , which set Wessex free . Some say that the white
horse which is cut in the side of the chalk hills near Edington was
cut then , that men might remember the great battle of Ethandun . But
it has been altered in modern times to make it look more like a real
horse . 

All this time Alfred seems to have kept his headquarters at
Athelney . Thence they went to Wedmore . There the Wise Men came
together , and Alfred and Guthorm  ( or , to give him the name by which
he was baptised , Aethelstan ) made a treaty . This treaty was very
much better kept than any treaty with the Danes had ever been kept
before . The Danes got much the larger part of England; still Alfred
contrived to keep London . Some accounts say that only those of the
Danes stayed in England who chose to become Christians , and that the
rest went away into Gaul under a famous leader of theirs named
Hasting . Anyhow , in 880 they went quite away into what was now their
own land of East-Anglia , and divided it among themselves . Thus
Alfred had quite freed his own Kingdom from the Danes , though he was
obliged to leave so much of the island in their hands . And even
through all these misfortunes , the Kingdom of Wessex did in some
sort become greater . Remember that in 880 , when Alfred had done so
many great things , he was still only thirty-one years old . 

We can see how much people always remembered and thought of Alfred , 
by there being many more stories told of him than of almost any
other of the old Kings . One story is that Alfred , wishing to know
what the Danes were about and how strong they were , set out one day
from Athelney in the disguise of a minstrel or juggler , and went
into the Danish camp , and stayed there several days , amusing the
Danes with his playing , till he had seen all that he wanted , and
then went back without any one finding him out . This is what you may
call a soldier ' s story , while some of the others are rather what
monks and clergymen would like to tell . Thus there is a tale which
is told in a great many different ways , but of which the following
is the oldest shape . 

 " Now King Alfred was driven from his Kingdom by the Danes , and he
lay hid for three years in the isle of Glastonbury . And it came to
pass on a day that all his folk were gone out to fish , save only
Alfred himself and his wife and one servant whom he loved . And there
came a pilgrim to the King , and begged for food . And the King said
to his servant ,  ' What food have we in the house ? ' And his servant
answered ,  ' My Lord , we have in the house but one loaf and a little
wine . ' Then the King gave thanks to God , and said ,  ' Give half of the
loaf and half of the wine to this poor pilgrim . ' So the servant did
as his lord commanded him , and gave to the pilgrim half of the loaf
and half of the wine , and the pilgrim gave great thanks to the King . 
And when the servant returned , he found the loaf whole , and the wine
as much as there had been aforetime . And he greatly wondered , and he
wondered also how the pilgrim had come into the isle , for that no
man could come there save by water , and the pilgrim had no boat . And
the King greatly wondered also . And at the ninth hour came back the
folk who had gone to fish . And they had three boats full of fish , 
and they said ,  ' Lo , we have caught more fish this day than in all
the three years that we have tarried in this island . ' And the King
was glad , and he and his folk were merry; yet he pondered much upon
that which had come to pass . And when night came , the King went to
his bed with Ealhswyth his wife . And the Lady slept , but the King
lay awake and thought of all that had come to pass by day . And
presently he saw a great light , like the brightness of the sun , and
he saw an old man with black hair , clothed in priest ' s garments , and
with a mitre on his head , and holding in his right hand a book of
the Gospels adorned with gold and gems . And the old man blessed the
King , and the King said unto him ,  ' Who art thou ? ' And he answered , 
 ' Alfred , my son , rejoice; for I am he to whom thou didst this day
give thine alms , and I am called Cuthberht the soldier of Christ . 
Now be strong and very courageous , and be of joyful heart , and
hearken diligently to the things which I say unto thee; for
henceforth I will be thy shield and thy friend , and I will watch
over thee and over thy sons after thee . And now I will tell thee
what thou must do . Rise up early in the morning , and blow thine horn
thrice , that thy enemies may hear it and fear , and by the ninth hour
thou shalt have around thee five hundred men harnassed for the
battle . And this shall be a sign unto thee that thou mayest believe . 
And after seven days thou shalt have by God ' s gift and my help all
the folk of this land gathered unto thee upon the mount that is
called Assandun . And thus shalt thou fight against thine enemies , 
and doubt not that thou shalt overcome them . Be thou therefore glad
of heart , and be strong and very courageous , and fear not , for God
hath given thine enemies into thine hand . And He hath given thee
also all this land and the Kingdom of thy fathers , to thee and to
thy sons and to thy sons ' sons after thee . Be thou faithful to me
and to my folk , because that unto thee is given all the land of
Albion . Be thou righteous , because thou art chosen to be the King of
all Britain . So may God be merciful unto thee , and I will be thy
friend , and none of thine enemies shall ever be able to overcome
thee . ' Then was King Alfred glad at heart , and he was strong and
very courageous , for that he knew that he would overcome his enemies
by the help of God and Saint Cuthberht his patron . So in the morning
he arose , and sailed to the land , and blew his horn three times , and
when his friends heard it they were glad , and when his enemies heard
it they feared . And by the ninth hour , according to the word of the
Lord , there were gathered unto him five hundred men of the bravest
and dearest of his friends . And he spake unto them and told them all
that God had said unto him by the mouth of his servant Cuthberht , 
and he told them that , by the gift of God and by the help of Saint
Cuthberht , they would overcome their enemies and win back their own
land . And he bade them as Saint Cuthberht had taught him , to fear
God alway and to be alway righteous toward all men . And he bade his
son Edward who was by him to be faithful to God and Saint Cuthberht , 
and so he should alway have the victory over his enemies . So they
went forth to battle and smote their enemies and overcame them , and
King Alfred took the Kingdom of all Britain , and he ruled well and
wisely over the just and the unjust for the rest of his days . " 

Now is there any truth in all this story ? I think there is thus
much , that Alfred , for some reason or other , thought he was under
the special protection of Saint Cuthberht . For several years after
880 there was peace in the land , and for a good many more years
still there was much less fighting than there had been before . It
was no doubt at this time that Alfred was able to do all those
things for the good of his people of which we hear so much . He had
now more time than either before or after for making his laws , 
writing his books , founding his monasteries , and doing all that he
did . You may wonder how he found time to do so much; but it was by
the only way by which anybody can do anything , namely , by never
wasting his time , and by having fixed times of the day for
everything . Alfred did not , like most other writers of that time , 
write in Latin , so that hardly anybody but the clergy could read or
understand what he wrote . He loved our own tongue , and was
especially fond of the Old-English songs , and all that he wrote he
wrote in English that all his people might understand . His works
were chiefly translations from Latin books; what we should have
valued most of all , his notebook or handbook , containing his remarks
on various matters , is lost . He translated into English the History
of Basda , the History of Orosius , some of the works of Pope Gregory
the Great , and the Consolation of Philosophy by Boethius . Perhaps
you will ask why he did not rather translate some of the great and
famous Greek and Latin writers of earlier times . Now we may be sure
that King Alfred did not understand Greek at all; very few people in
those days in the West of Europe knew any Greek , except those who
needed to use the language for dealing with the men in the Eastern
Empire who still spoke it . Indeed Alfred complains that , when he
came to the Crown , very few people , even among the clergy , 
understood even Latin at all well . And as for Latin books , no doubt
Alfred thought that the writings of Christians would be more
edifying to his people than those of the old heathens . He chose the
History of Orosius , as a general history of the world , and that of
Basda , as a particular history of England . Boethius was a Roman
Consul in the beginning of the sixth century , who was put to death
by the great Theodoric , King of the East-Goths , who then ruled over
Italy . While he was in prison he wrote the book which King Alfred
translated . He seems not to have been a Christian; at least there is
not a single Christian expression in his book . But people fancied
that he was not only a Christian , but a saint and a martyr , most
likely because Theodoric , who put him to death , was not an orthodox
Christian , but an Arian . Alfred , in translating his books , did not
always care to translate them quite exactly , but he often altered
and put in things of his own , if he thought he could thus make them
more improving . So in translating Boethius , he altered a good deal , 
to make the wise heathen speak like a Christian . So in translating
Orosius , where Orosius gives an account of the world , Alfred greatly
enlarged the account of all the northern part of Europe , of which
Alfred naturally knew much more than Orosius did . 

Alfred was also very careful in the government of his Kingdom , 
especially in seeing that justice was properly administered . So men
said of him in their songs , much as they had long before said of
King Edwin in Northumberland , that he hung up golden bracelets by
the roadside , and that no man dared to steal them . In his collection
of laws , he chiefly put in order the laws of the older Kings , not
adding many of his own , because he said that he did not know how
those who came after him might like them . 

King Alfred was very attentive to religious matters , and gave great
alms to the poor and gifts to churches . He also founded two
monasteries; one was for nuns , at Shaftesbury in Dorsetshire , of
which he made his own daughter , Aethelgifu , abbess . The other was
for monks at Athelney; you can easily see why he should build it
there . He also sent several embassies to Rome , where he got Pope
Marinus to grant certain privileges to the English School at Rome;
the Pope also sent him what was thought to be a piece of the wood of
the True Cross , that on which our Lord Jesus Christ died . He also
sent an embassy to Jerusalem , and had letters from Abel the
Patriarch there . And what seems stranger than all , he sent an
embassy all the way to India , with alms for the Christians there , 
called the Christians of Saint Thomas and Saint Bartholomew . 

Lastly , there seems some reason to think that the Chronicle began to
be put together in its present shape in Alfred ' s time , and that it
was regularly gone on with afterward , so that from the time of
Alfred onward we have a history which was regularly written down as
things happened . 

All these things happened mainly in the middle years of the reign of
Alfred , when there was so much less fighting than there was before
and after , and when some years seem to have been quite peaceable . 
Guthorm Aethelstan and his Danes in East-Anglia were for some years
true to the treaty of Wedmore , and the other Danes seem just now to
have been busy in invading Gaul and other parts of the continent
rather than England . Also King Alfred had now got a fleet , so that
he often met them at sea and kept them from landing . This he did in
882 , and we do not find that any Danes landed again in England till
885 . In that year part of the army which had been plundering along
the coast of Flanders and Holland came over to England , landed in
Kent , and besieged Rochester . But the citizens withstood them
bravely , and Alfred gathered an army and drove the Danes to their
ships . They seem then to have gone to Essex and to have plundered
there with their ships , getting help from the Danes who were settled
in East-Anglia , or at least from such of them as still were
heathens . Alfred ' s fleet however quite overcame them and took away
their treasure , but his fleet was again attacked and defeated by the
East-Anglian Danes . It would seem that in some part of this war
Guthorm Aethelstan was helped by Hrolf , otherwise called Rollo , the
great Northern chief . 

The Danish wars began again in 893 . For years now there was a great
deal of fighting . Two large bodies of Danes , one of them under the
famous chief Hasting , landed in Kent in 893 and fixed themselves in
fortresses which they built . And the Danes who had settled in
Northumberland and East-Anglia helped them , though they had all
sworn oaths to King Alfred , and those in East-Anglia had also given
hostages . There was fighting all over the south of England
throughout 894 , and the King had to go constantly backward and
forward to keep up with the Danes . One time Alfred took a fort in
Kent , in which were the wife and two sons of Hasting . Now Hasting
had not long before given oaths and hostages to Alfred , and the two
boys had been baptised , the King being godfather to one of them and
Alderman Aethelred to the other . But Hasting did not at all keep to
his oath , but went on plundering all the same . Still , when the boys
and their mother were taken , Alfred would not do them any harm , but
gave them up again to Hasting . 

In 897 we read that Alfred made some improvements in his ships . 
 " They were full-nigh twice as long as the others; some had sixty
oars , some more; they were both swifter and steadier and eke higher
than the others; they were neither on the Frisian shape nor on the
Danish , but as himself thought that they useful might be . " These new
ships seem to have done good service , though one time they got
aground , seemingly because they were so large , and the Danes were
therefore able to sail out before them . These sea-fights along the
south coast were nearly the last things that we hear of in Alfred ' s
reign . The crews of two Danish ships were brought to Winchester to
Alfred and there hanged . One cannot blame him for this , as these
Danes were mere pirates , not engaged in any lawful war , and many of
them had been spared , and had made oaths to Alfred , and had broken
them , over and over again . 

This was in 897; the rest of King Alfred ' s reign seems to have been
spent in peace . In 901 the great King died himself . He was then only
fifty-two years old . Alfred ' s wife , the Lady Ealhswyth , lived a
little while after her husband , till 903 or 905 . King Alfred was
buried at Winchester in the New Minster which he himself began to
found and which was finished by his son Edward . It then stood close
to the Old Minster , that is , the cathedral church . Afterward it was
moved out of the city and was called Hyde Abbey . But you cannot see
King Alfred ' s grave there now , because everything has been
destroyed , and the bones of the great King have been turned out , to
make room for a prison . 


