Once upon a time there was a man who had a daughter , who was called
 " Clever Alice ; " and when she was grown up , her father said ,  " We must
see about her marrying . " 

 " Yes , " replied her mother ,  " whenever a young man shall appear who is
worthy of her . " 

At last a certain youth , by name Hans , came from a distance to make a
proposal of marriage but he required one condition , that the Clever
Alice should be very prudent . 

 " Oh , " said her father ,  " no fear of that ! she has got a head full of
brains ; " and the mother added ,  " Ah , she can see the wind blow up the
street , and hear the flies cough ! " 

 " Very well , " replied Hans ;  " but remember , if she is not very prudent , 
I will not take her . " Soon afterwards they sat down to dinner , and her
mother said ,  " Alice , go down into the cellar and draw some beer . " 

So Clever Alice took the jug down from the wall , and went into the
cellar , jerking the lid up and down on her way , to pass away the time . 
As soon as she got downstairs , she drew a stool and placed it before
the cask , in order that she might not have to stoop , for she thought
stooping might in some way injure her back , and give it an
undesirable bend . Then she placed the can before her and turned the
tap , and while the beer was running , as she did not wish her eyes to
be idle , she looked about upon the wall above and below . Presently she
perceived , after much peeping into this corner and that corner , a
hatchet , which the bricklayers had left behind , sticking out of the
ceiling right above her head . At the sight of this Clever Alice began
to cry , saying ,  " Oh ! if I marry Hans , and we have a child , and he
grows up , and we send him into the cellar to draw beer , the hatchet
will fall upon his head and kill him ; " and so she sat there weeping
with all her might over the impending misfortune . 

Meanwhile the good folks upstairs were waiting for the beer , but as
Clever Alice did not come , her mother told the maid to go and see what
she was stopping for . The maid went down into the cellar , and found
Alice sitting before the cask crying heartily , and she asked ,  " Alice , 
what are you weeping about ? " 

 " Ah , " she replied ,  " have I not cause ? If I marry Hans , and we have a
child , and he grow up , and we send him here to draw beer , that hatchet
will fall upon his head and kill him . " 

 " Oh , " said the maid ,  " what a clever Alice we have ! " And , sitting down , 
she began to weep , too , for the misfortune that was to happen . 

After a while , when the servant did not return , the good folks above
began to feel very thirsty ; so the husband told the boy to go down
into the cellar , and see what had become of Alice and the maid . The
boy went down , and there sat Clever Alice and the maid both crying , 
so he asked the reason ; and Alice told him the same tale , of the
hatchet that was to fall on her child , if she married Hans , and if
they had a child . When she had finished , the boy exclaimed ,  " What a
clever Alice we have ! " and fell weeping and howling with the others . 

Upstairs they were still waiting , and the husband said , when the boy
did not return ,  " Do you go down , wife , into the cellar and see why
Alice stays so long . " So she went down , and finding all three sitting
there crying , asked the reason , and Alice told her about the hatchet
which must inevitably fall upon the head of her son . Then the mother
likewise exclaimed ,  " Oh , what a clever Alice we have ! " and , sitting
down , began to weep as much as any of the rest . 

Meanwhile the husband waited for his wife ' s return ; but at last he
felt so very thirsty , that he said ,  " I must go myself down into the
cellar and see what is keeping our Alice . " As soon as he entered the
cellar , there he found the four sitting and crying together , and when
he heard the reason , he also exclaimed ,  " Oh , what a clever Alice we
have ! " and sat down to cry with the whole strength of his lungs . 

All this time the bridegroom above sat waiting , but when nobody
returned , he thought they must be waiting for him , and so he went down
to see what was the matter . When he entered , there sat the five crying
and groaning , each one in a louder key than his neighbour . 

 " What misfortune has happened ? " he asked . 

 " Ah , dear Hans ! " cried Alice ,  " if you and I should marry one another , 
and have a child , and he grow up , and we , perhaps , send him down to
this cellar to tap the beer , the hatchet which has been left sticking
up there may fall on his head , and so kill him : and do you not think
this is enough to weep about ? " 

 " Now , " said Hans ,  " more prudence than this is not necessary for my
housekeeping ; because you are such a clever Alice , I will have you for
my wife . " And , taking her hand , he led her home , and celebrated the
wedding directly . 

After they had been married a little while , Hans said one morning , 
 " Wife , I will go out to work and earn some money ; do you go into the
field and gather some corn wherewith to make bread . " 

 " Yes , " she answered ,  " I will do so , dear Hans . " And when he was gone , 
she cooked herself a nice mess of pottage to take with her . As she
came to the field she said to herself ,  " What shall I do ? Shall I cut
first , or eat first ? Ay , I will eat first ! " Then she ate up the
contents of her pot , and when it was finished , she thought to herself , 
 " Now , shall I reap first or sleep first ? Well , I think I will have a
nap ! " and so she laid herself down amongst the corn , and went to
sleep . 

Meanwhile Hans returned home , but Alice did not come , and so he said , 
 " Oh , what a prudent Alice I have ! She is so industrious that she does
not even come home to eat anything . " By-and-by , however , evening came
on , and still she did not return ; so Hans went out to see how much
she had reaped ; but , behold , nothing at all , and there lay Alice fast
asleep among the corn ! So home he ran very fast , and brought a net
with little bells hanging on it , which he threw over her head while
she still slept on . When he had done this , he went back again and shut
to the house-door , and , seating himself on his stool , began working
very industriously . 

At last , when it was nearly dark , the Clever Alice awoke , and as soon
as she stood up , the net fell all over her hair , and the bells jingled
at every step she took . This quite frightened her , and she began to
doubt whether she were really Clever Alice , and said to herself ,  " Am I
she , or am I not ? " This was a question she could not answer , and she
stood still a long while considering about it . At last she thought she
would go home and ask whether she were really herself--supposing
somebody would be able to tell her . When she came to the house-door it
was shut ; so she tapped at the window , and asked ,  " Hans , is Alice
within ? "  " Yes , " he replied ,  " she is . " At which answer she became
really terrified , and exclaiming ,  " Ah , heaven , then I am not Alice ! " 
she ran up to another house , intending to ask the same question . But
as soon as the folks within heard the jingling of the bells in her
net , they refused to open their doors , and nobody would receive her . 
So she ran straight away from the village , and no one has ever seen
her since . 