As we approached Molokai I found that the slow work of centuries had
nearly covered its lava with verdure . At dawn we were opposite
Kalaupapa . Two little spired churches , looking precisely alike , 
caught my eye first , and around them were dotted the white cottages
of the lepers . But the sea was too rough for us to land . The waves
dashed against the rocks , and the spray rose fifty feet into the
air . 

We went on to Kalawao , but were again disappointed; it was too
dangerous to disembark . Finally it was decided to put off a boat for
a rocky point about a mile and a half distant from the town . 
Climbing down this point we saw about twenty lepers , and  " There is
Father Damien ! " said our purser; and , slowly moving along the
hillside , I saw a dark figure with a large straw hat . He came rather
painfully down , and sat near the water-side , and we exchanged
friendly signals across the waves while my baggage was being got out
of the hold--a long business , owing to the violence of the sea . At
last all was ready , and we went swinging across the waves , and
finally chose a fit moment for leaping on shore . Father Damien
caught me by the hand , and a hearty welcome shone from his kindly
face as he helped me up the rock . He immediately called me by my
name ,  " Edward , " and said it was  " like everything else , a
providence , " that he had met me at that irregular landing-place , for
he had expected the ship to stop at Kalaupapa . 

He was now forty-nine years old--a thick-set , strongly built man , 
with black curly hair and short beard , turning gray . His countenance
must have been handsome , with a full , well-curved mouth and a short , 
straight nose; but he was now a good deal disfigured by leprosy , 
though not so badly as to make it anything but a pleasure to look at
his bright , sensible face . His forehead was swollen and rigid , the
eyebrows gone , the nose somewhat sunk , and the ears greatly
enlarged . His hands and face looked uneven with a sort of incipient
boils , and his body also showed many signs of the disease , but he
assured me that he had felt little or no pain since he had tried Dr . 
Goto ' s system of hot baths and Japanese medicine . The bathrooms that
have been provided by the Government are very nice . 

A large wooden box of presents from English friends , had been
unshipped with the gurjun oil . It was , however , so large that Father
Damien said it would be impossible for his lepers either to land it
from the boat or to carry it to Kalawao , and that it must be
returned to the steamer and landed on some voyage when the sea was
quieter . But I could not give up the pleasure of his enjoyment in
its contents , so after some delay it was forced open in the boat , 
and the things were handed out one by one across the waves . The
lepers all came round with their poor marred faces , and the presents
were carried home by them and our two selves . 

As we ascended the hill on which the village is built Father Damien
showed me on our left the chicken farm . The lepers are justly proud
of it , and before many days I had a fine fowl sent me for dinner , 
which , after a little natural timidity , I ate with thankfulness . 

On arriving at Kalawao we speedily found ourselves inside the half-
finished church which was the darling of his heart . How he enjoyed
planning the places where the pictures which I had just brought him
should be placed ! By the side of this church he showed me the palm-
tree under which he lived for some weeks when he first arrived at
the settlement , in 1873 . His own little four-roomed house almost
joins the church . 

After dinner we went up the little flight of steps which led to
Father Damien ' s balcony . This was shaded by a honeysuckle in
blossom . Some of my happiest times at Molokai were spent in this
little balcony , sketching him and listening to what he said . The
lepers came up to watch my progress , and it was pleasant to see how
happy and at home they were . Their poor faces were often swelled and
drawn and distorted , with bloodshot goggle eyes . 

I offered to give a photograph of the picture to his brother in
Belgium , but he said perhaps it would be better not to do so , as it
might pain him to see how he was disfigured . He looked mournfully at
my work .  " What an ugly face ! " he said;  " I did not know the disease
had made such progress . " Looking-glasses are not in great request at
Molokai ! 

While I sketched him he often read his breviary . At other times we
talked on subjects that interested us both , especially about the
work of the Church Army , and sometimes I sang hymns to him--among
others ,  " Brief life is here our portion , "  " Art thou weary , art thou
languid ? " and  " Safe home in port . " At such times the expression of
his face was particularly sweet and tender . One day I asked him if
he would like to send a message to Cardinal Manning . He said that it
was not for such as he to send a message to so great a dignitary , 
but after a moment ' s hesitation he added ,  " I send my humble respects
and thanks . " I need scarcely say that he gave himself no airs of
martyr , saint , or hero--a humbler man I never saw . He smiled
modestly and deprecatingly when I gave him the Bishop of
Peterborough ' s message-- " He won ' t accept the blessing of a heretic
bishop , but tell him that he has my prayers , and ask him to give me
his . "  " Does he call himself a heretic bishop ? " he asked doubtfully , 
and I had to explain that the bishop had probably used the term
playfully . 

One day he told me about his early history . He was born on the 3rd
of January , 1841 , near Louvain in Belgium . On his nineteenth
birthday his father took him to see his brother , who was then
preparing for the priesthood , and he left him there to dine , while
he himself went on to the neighbouring town . Young Joseph  ( this was
his baptismal name ) decided that there was the opportunity for
taking the step which he had long been desiring to take , and when
his father came back he told him that he wished to return home no
more , and that it would be better thus to miss the pain of
farewells . His father consented unwillingly , but , as he was obliged
to hurry to the conveyance which was to take him home , there was no
time for demur , and they parted at the station . Afterward , when all
was settled , Joseph revisited his home , and received his mother ' s
approval and blessing . 

His brother was bent on going to the South Seas for mission work , 
and all was arranged accordingly; but at the last he was laid low
with fever , and , to his bitter disappointment , forbidden to go . The
impetuous Joseph asked if it would be a consolation to his brother
if he were to go instead , and , receiving an affirmative answer , he
wrote surreptitiously , offering himself , and begging that he might
be sent , though his education was not yet finished . The students
were not allowed to send out letters till they had been submitted to
the Superior , but Joseph ventured to disobey . 

One day , as he sat at his studies , the Superior came in , and said , 
with a tender reproach ,  " Oh , you impatient boy ! you have written
this letter , and you are to go . " 

Joseph jumped up , and ran out , and leaped about like a young colt . 

 " Is he crazy ? " said the other students . 

He worked for some years on other islands in the Pacific , but it
happened that he was one day in 1873 present at the dedication of a
chapel in the island of Maui , when the bishop was lamenting that it
was impossible for him to send a missioner to the lepers at Molokai
and still less to provide them with a pastor . He had only been able
to send them occasional and temporary help . Some young priests had
just arrived in Hawaii for mission work , and Father Damien instantly
spoke . 

 " Monseigneur , " said he ,  " here are your new missioners; one of them
could take my district , and if you will be kind enough to allow it , 
I will go to Molokai and labour for the poor lepers whose wretched
state of bodily and spiritual misfortune has often made my heart
bleed within me . " 

His offer was accepted , and that very day , without any farewells , he
embarked on a boat that was taking some cattle to the leper
settlement . When he first put his foot on the island he said to
himself ,  " Now Joseph , my boy , this is your life-work . " 

I did not find one person in the Sandwich Islands who had the least
doubt as to leprosy being contagious , though it is possible to be
exposed to the disease for years without contracting it . Father
Damien told me that he had always expected that he should sooner or
later become a leper , though exactly how he caught it he does not
know . But it was not likely that he would escape , as he was
constantly living in a polluted atmosphere , dressing the sufferers ' 
sores , washing their bodies , visiting their death-beds , and even
digging their graves . In his own words is a report of the state of
things at Molokai sixteen years ago , and I think a portion will be
interesting : 

 " By special providence of our Divine Lord , who during His public
life showed a particular sympathy for the lepers , my way was traced
toward Kalawao in May , 1873 . I was then thirty-three years of age , 
enjoying a robust good health . 

 " About eighty of the lepers were in the hospital; the others , with a
very few Kokuas  ( helpers ) , had taken their abode farther up toward
the valley . They had cut down the old pandanus groves to build their
houses , though a great many had nothing but branches of castor-oil
trees with which to construct their small shelters . These frail
frames were covered with ki leaves or with sugar-cane leaves , the
best ones with pili grass . I , myself , was sheltered during several
weeks under the single pandanus-tree which is preserved up to the
present in the churchyard . Under such primitive roofs were living
without distinction of age or sex , old or new cases , all more or
less strangers one to another , those unfortunate outcasts of
society . They passed their time with playing cards , hula  ( native
dances ) , drinking fermented ki-root beer , home-made alcohol , and
with the sequels of all this . Their clothes were far from being
clean and decent , on account of the scarcity of water , which had to
be brought at that time from a great distance . Many a time in
fulfilling my priestly duty at their domiciles I have been compelled
to run outside to breathe fresh air . To counteract the bad smell I
made myself accustomed to the use of tobacco , whereupon the smell of
the pipe preserved me somewhat from carrying in my clothes the
noxious odour of the lepers . At that time the progress of the
disease was fearful , and the rate of mortality very high . The
miserable condition of the settlement gave it the name of a living
graveyard , which name , I am happy to state , is to-day no longer
applicable to our place . " 

In 1874 a  " cona "  ( south ) wind blew down most of the lepers ' 
wretched , rotten abodes , and the poor sufferers lay shivering in the
wind and rain , with clothes and blankets wet through . In a few days
the grass beneath their sleeping-mats began to emit a  " very
unpleasant vapour . "  " I at once , " says Father Damien ,  " called the
attention of our sympathising agent to the fact , and very soon there
arrived several schooner-loads of scantling to build solid frames
with , and all lepers in distress received , on application , the
necessary material for the erection of decent houses . " Friends sent
them rough boards and shingles and flooring . Some of the lepers had
a little money , and hired carpenters . For those without means the
priest , with his leper boys , did the work of erecting a good many
small houses . 

 " I remember well that when I arrived here , " again says Father
Damien ,  " the poor people were without any medicines , with the
exception of a few physics and their own native remedies . It was a
common sight to see people going round with fearful ulcers , which , 
for the want of a few rags or a piece of lint and a little salve , 
were left exposed . Not only were their sores neglected but any one
getting a fever , or any of the numerous ailments that lepers are
heir to , was carried off for want of some simple medicine . 

 " Previous to my arrival here it was acknowledged and spoken of in
the public papers as well as in private letters that the greatest
want at Kalawao was a spiritual leader . It was owing in a great
measure to this want that vice as a general rule existed instead of
virtue , and degradation of the lowest type went ahead as a leader of
the community .  . . . When once the disease prostrated them women and
children were often cast out , and had to find some other shelter . 
Sometimes they were laid behind a stone wall , and left there to die , 
and at other times a hired hand would carry them to the hospital . 

 " As there were so many dying people , my priestly duty toward them
often gave me the opportunity to visit them at their domiciles , and
although my exhortations were especially addressed to the prostrated
often they would fall upon the ears of public sinners , who little by
little became conscious of the consequences of their wicked lives , 
and began to reform , and thus , with the hope in a merciful Saviour , 
gave up their bad habits . 

 " Kindness to all , charity to the needy , a sympathising hand to the
sufferers and the dying , in conjunction with a solid religious
instruction to my listeners , have been my constant means to
introduce moral habits among the lepers . I am happy to say that , 
assisted by the local administration , my labours here , which seemed
to be almost in vain at the beginning , have , thanks to a kind
Providence , been greatly crowned with success . " 

The water supply of Molokai was a pleasant subject with Father
Damien . When he first arrived the lepers could only obtain water by
carrying it from the gulch on their poor shoulders; they had also to
take their clothes to some distance when they required washing , and
it was no wonder that they lived in a very dirty state . He was much
exercised about the matter , and one day , to his great joy , he was
told that at the end of a valley called Waihanau there was a natural
reservoir . He set out with two white men and some of his boys , and
travelled up the valley till he came with delight to a nearly
circular basin of most delicious ice-cold water . Its diameter was
seventy-two feet by fifty-five , and not far from the bank they
found , on sounding , that it was eighteen feet deep . There it lay at
the foot of a high cliff , and he was informed by the natives that
there had never been a drought in which this basin had dried up . He
did not rest till a supply of waterpipes had been sent them , which
he and all the able lepers went to work and laid . Henceforth clear
sweet water has been available for all who desire to drink , to wash , 
or to bathe . 

It was after living at the leper settlement for about ten years that
Father Damien began to suspect that he was a leper . The doctors
assured him that this was not the case . But he once scalded himself
in his foot , and to his horror he felt no pain . Anaesthesia had
begun , and soon other fatal signs appeared . One day he asked Dr . 
Arning , the great German doctor who was then resident in Molokai , to
examine him carefully . 

 " I cannot bear to tell you , " said Dr . Arning ,  " but what you say is
true . " 

 " It is no shock to me , " said Damien ,  " for I have felt sure of it . " 

I may mention here that there are three kinds of leprosy . Father
Damien suffered  ( as is often the case ) both from the anaesthetic and
the tubercular forms of the disease .  " Whenever I preach to my
people , " he said ,  " I do not say  ' my brethren , ' as you do , but  ' we
lepers . ' People pity me and think me unfortunate , but I think myself
the happiest of missionaries . " 

Henceforth he came under the law of segregation , and journeys to the
ether parts of the islands were forbidden . But he worked on with the
same sturdy , cheerful fortitude , accepting the will of God with
gladness , undaunted by the continual reminders of his coming fate , 
which met him in the poor creatures around him . 

 " I would not be cured , " he said to me ,  " if the price of my cure was
that I must leave the island and give up my work . " 

A lady wrote to him ,  " You have given up all earthly things to serve
God here and to help others , and I believe you must have NOW joy
that nothing can take from you and a great reward hereafter . " 

 " Tell her , " he said , with a quiet smile ,  " that it is true . I DO have
that joy now . " 

He seldom talked of himself except in answer to questions , and he
had always about him the simplicity of a great man-- " clothed with
humility . " 

My last letter from him is dated : 

 " KALAWAO , 28th February , 1889 . 

 " My DEAR EDWARD CLIFFORD--Your sympathising letter of 24th gives me
some relief in my rather distressed condition . I try my best to
carry , without much complaining and in a practical way , for my poor
soul ' s sanctification , the long-foreseen miseries of the disease , 
which , after all , is a providential agent to detach the heart from
all earthly affection , and prompts much the desire of a Christian
soul to be united--the sooner the better--with Him who is her only
life . 

 " During your long travelling road homeward please do not forget the
narrow road . We both have to walk carefully , so as to meet together
at the home of our common and eternal Father . My kind regards and
prayers and good wishes for all sympathising friends . Bon voyage , 
mon cher ami , et au revoir au ceil--Votus tuus , 

 " J . Damien . " 

About three weeks after writing this letter he felt sure that his
end was near , and on the 28th March he took to his bed . 

 " You see my hands , " he said .  " All the wounds are healing and the
crust is becoming black . You know that is a sign of death . Look at
my eyes too . I have seen so many lepers die that I cannot be
mistaken . Death is not far off . I should have liked to see the
Bishop again , but le bon Dieu is calling me to keep Easter with
Himself . God be blessed ! 

 " How good He is to have preserved me long enough to have two priests
by my side at my last moments , and also to have the good Sisters of
Charity at the Leproserie . That has been my Nunc Dimittis . The work
of the lepers is assured , and I am no longer necessary , and so will
go up yonder . " 

Father Wendolen said ,  " When you are up above , father , you will not
forget those you leave orphans behind you ? " 

 " Oh no ! If I have any credit with God , I will intercede for all in
the Leproserie . " 

 " And will you , like Elijah , leave me your mantle , my father , in
order that I may have your great heart ? " 

 " Why , what would you do with it ? " said the dying martyr ,  " it is full
of leprosy . " 

He rallied for a little while after this , and his watchers even had
a little hope that his days might be lengthened . Father Conradi , 
Father Wendolen , and Brother Joseph were much in his company . 
Brother James was his constant nurse . The Sisters from Kalaupapa
visited him often , and it is good to think that the sweet placid
face and gentle voice of the Mother were near him in his last days . 
Everybody admired his wonderful patience . He who had been so ardent , 
so strong , and so playful , was now powerless on his couch . He lay on
the ground on a wretched mattress like the poorest leper . They had
the greatest difficulty in getting him to accept a bed .  " And how
poorly off he was; he who had spent so much money to relieve the
lepers had so forgotten himself that he had none of the comforts and
scarcely the necessaries of life . " Sometimes he suffered intensely;
sometimes he was partly unconscious . He said that he was continually
conscious of two persons being present with him . One was at the head
of his bed and one at his feet . But who they were he did not say . 
The terrible disease had concentrated itself in his mouth and
throat . As he lay there in his tiny domicile , with the roar of the
sea getting fainter to his poor diseased ears , and the kind face of
Brother James becoming gradually indistinct before his failing eyes , 
did the thought come to him that after all his work was poor , and
his life half a failure ? Many whom he had hoped much of had
disappointed him . Not much praise had reached him . The tide of
affection and sympathy from England had cheered him , but England was
so far off that it seemed almost like sympathy and affection from a
star . Churches were built , schools and hospitals were in working
order , but there was still much to be done . He was only forty-nine , 
and he was dying . 

 " Well ! God ' s will be done . He knows best . My work , with all its
faults and failures , is in His hands , and before Easter I shall see
my Saviour . " 

The breathing grew more laboured , the leprous eyes were clouded , the
once stalwart frame was fast becoming rigid . The sound of the
passing bell was heard , and the wail of the wretched lepers pierced
the air .  . . . The last flickering breath was breathed , and the soul
of Joseph Damien de Veuster arose like a lark to God . ﻿

I

HANS IN LUCK


Hans had served his Master seven years , and at the end of that time he
said to him :  " Master , since my time is up , I should like to go home to
my mother; so give me my wages , if you please . " 

His Master replied ,  " You have served me truly and honestly , Hans , and
such as your service was , such shall be your reward; " and with these
words he gave him a lump of gold as big as his head . Hans thereupon took
his handkerchief out of his pocket , and , wrapping the gold up in it , 
threw it over his shoulder and set out on the road toward his native
village . As he went along , carefully setting one foot to the ground
before the other , a horseman came in sight , trotting gaily and briskly
along upon a capital animal .  " Ah , " said Hans , aloud ,  " what a fine thing
that riding is ! one is seated , as it were , upon a stool , kicks against
no stones , spares one ' s shoes , and gets along without any trouble ! " 

The Rider , overhearing Hans making these reflections , stopped and said , 
 " Why , then , do you travel on foot , my fine fellow ? " 

 " Because I am forced , " replied Hans ,  " for I have got a bit of a lump to
carry home; it certainly is gold , but then I can ' t carry my head
straight , and it hurts my shoulder . " 

 " If you like we will exchange , " said the Rider .  " I will give you my
horse , and you can give me your lump of gold . " 

 " With all my heart , " cried Hans;  " but I tell you fairly you undertake a
very heavy burden . " 

The man dismounted , took the gold , and helped Hans on to the horse , and , 
giving him the reins into his hands , said ,  " Now , when you want to go
faster , you must chuckle with your tongue and cry ,  ' Gee up ! gee up ! ' " 

Hans was delighted indeed when he found himself on the top of a horse , 
and riding along so freely and gaily . After a while he thought he should
like to go rather quicker , and so he cried ,  " Gee up ! gee up ! " as the man
had told him . The horse soon set off at a hard trot , and , before Hans
knew what he was about , he was thrown over head and heels into a ditch
which divided the fields from the road . The horse , having accomplished
this feat , would have bolted off if he had not been stopped by a Peasant
who was coming that way , driving a cow before him . Hans soon picked
himself up on his legs , but he was terribly put out , and said to the
countryman ,  " That is bad sport , that riding , especially when one mounts
such a beast as that , which stumbles and throws one off so as to nearly
break one ' s neck . I will never ride on that animal again . Commend me to
your cow : one may walk behind her without any discomfort , and besides
one has , every day for certain , milk , butter , and cheese . Ah ! what would
I not give for such a cow ! " 

 " Well , " said the Peasant ,  " such an advantage you may soon enjoy; I will
exchange my cow for your horse . " 

To this Hans consented with a thousand thanks , and the Peasant , swinging
himself upon the horse , rode off in a hurry . 

Hans now drove his cow off steadily before him , thinking of his lucky
bargain in this wise :  " I have a bit of bread , and I can , as often as I
please , eat with it butter and cheese , and when I am thirsty I can milk
my cow and have a draught : and what more can I desire ? " 

As soon , then , as he came to an inn he halted , and ate with great
satisfaction all the bread he had brought with him for his noonday and
evening meals , and washed it down with a glass of beer , to buy which he
spent his two last farthings . This over , he drove his cow farther , but
still in the direction of his mother ' s village . The heat meantime became
more and more oppressive as noontime approached , and just then Hans came
to a common which was an hour ' s journey across . Here he got into such a
state of heat that his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth , and he
thought to himself :  " This won ' t do; I will just milk my cow , and refresh
myself . " Hans , therefore tied her to a stump of a tree , and , having no
pail , placed his leathern cap below , and set to work , but not a drop of
milk could he squeeze out . He had placed himself , too , very awkwardly , 
and at last the impatient cow gave him such a kick on the head that he
tumbled over on the ground , and for a long time knew not where he was . 
Fortunately , not many hours after , a Butcher passed by , trundling a
young pig along upon a wheelbarrow .  " What trick is this ! " exclaimed he , 
helping up poor Hans; and Hans told him that all that had passed . The
Butcher then handed him his flask and said ,  " There , take a drink; it
will revive you . Your cow might well give no milk : she is an old beast , 
and worth nothing at the best but for the plough or the butcher ! " 

 " Eh ! eh ! " said Hans , pulling his hair over his eyes ,  " who would have
thought it ? It is all very well when one can kill a beast like that at
home , and make a profit of the flesh; but for my part I have no relish
for cow ' s flesh; it is too tough for me ! Ah ! a young pig like yours is
the thing that tastes something like , let alone the sausages ! " 

 " Well now , for love of you , " said the Butcher ,  " I will make an exchange , 
and let you have my pig for your cow . " 

 " Heaven reward you for your kindness ! " cried Hans; and , giving up the
cow , he untied the pig from the barrow and took into his hands the
string with which it was tied . 

Hans walked on again , considering how everything had happened just as he
wished , and how all his vexations had turned out for the best after all ! 
Presently a boy overtook him carrying a fine white goose under his arm , 
and after they had said  " Good-day " to each other , Hans began to talk
about his luck , and what profitable exchanges he had made . The Boy on
his part told him that he was carrying the goose to a christening-feast . 
 " Just lift it , " said he to Hans , holding it up by its wings ,  " just feel
how heavy it is; why , it has been fattened up for the last eight weeks , 
and whoever bites it when it is cooked will have to wipe the grease from
each side of his mouth ! " 

 " Yes , " said Hans , weighing it with one hand ,  " it is weighty , but my pig
is no trifle either . " 

While he was speaking the Boy kept looking about on all sides , and
shaking his head suspiciously , and at length he broke out ,  " I am afraid
it is not all right about your pig . In the village through which I have
just come , one has been stolen out of the sty of the mayor himself; and
I am afraid , very much afraid , you have it now in your hand ! They have
sent out several people , and it would be a very bad job for you if they
found you with the pig; the best thing you can do is to hide it in some
dark corner ! " 

Honest Hans was thunderstruck , and exclaimed ,  " Ah , Heaven help me in
this fresh trouble ! you know the neighbourhood better than I do; do you
take my pig and let me have your goose , " said he to the boy . 

 " I shall have to hazard something at that game , " replied the Boy ,  " but
still I do not wish to be the cause of your meeting with misfortune; " 
and , so saying , he took the rope into his own hand , and drove the pig
off quickly by a side-path , while Hans , lightened of his cares , walked
on homeward with the goose under his arm .  " If I judge rightly , " thought
he to himself ,  " I have gained even by this exchange : first there is a
good roast; then the quantity of fat which will drip out will make goose
broth for a quarter of a year; and then there are fine white feathers , 
which , when once I have put into my pillow I warrant I shall sleep
without rocking . What pleasure my mother will have ! " 

As he came to the last village on his road there stood a Knife-grinder , 
with his barrow by the hedge , whirling his wheel round and singing : 

  " Scissors and razors and such-like I grind;
 And gaily my rags are flying behind . " 

Hans stopped and looked at him , and at last he said ,  " You appear to have
a good business , if I may judge by your merry song ? " 

 " Yes , " answered the Grinder ,  " this business has a golden bottom ! A true
knife-grinder is a man who as often as he puts his hand into his pocket
feels money in it ! But what a fine goose you have got; where did you buy
it ? " 

 " I did not buy it at all , " said Hans ,  " but took it in exchange for my
pig . "  " And the pig ? "  " I exchanged for my cow . "  " And the cow ? "  " I
exchanged a horse for her . "  " And the horse ? "  " For him I gave a lump of
gold as big as my head . "  " And the gold ? "  " That was my wages for a seven
years ' servitude . "  " And I see you have known how to benefit yourself
each time , " said the Grinder;  " but , could you now manage that you heard
the money rattling in your pocket as you walked , your fortune would be
made . " 

 " Well ! how shall I manage that ? " asked Hans . 

 " You must become a grinder like me; to this trade nothing peculiar
belongs but a grindstone; the other necessaries find themselves . Here is
one which is a little worn , certainly , and so I will not ask anything
more for it than your goose; are you agreeable ? " 

 " How can you ask me ? " said Hans;  " why , I shall be the luckiest man in
the world; having money as often as I dip my hand into my pocket , what
have I to care about any longer ? " 

So saying , he handed over the goose , and received the grindstone in
exchange . 

 " Now , " said the Grinder , picking up an ordinary big flint stone which
lay near ,  " now , there you have a capital stone upon which only beat them
long enough and you may straighten all your old nails ! Take it , and use
it carefully ! " 

Hans took the stone and walked on with a satisfied heart , his eyes
glistening with joy .  " I must have been born , " said he ,  " to a heap of
luck; everything happens just as I wish , as if I were a Sunday-child . " 

Soon , however , having been on his legs since daybreak , he began to feel
very tired , and was plagued too with hunger , since he had eaten all his
provision at once in his joy about the cow bargain . At last he felt
quite unable to go farther , and was forced , too , to halt every minute
for the stones encumbered him very much . Just then the thought overcame
him , what a good thing it were if he had no need to carry them any
longer , and at the same moment he came up to a stream . Here he resolved
to rest and refresh himself with drink , and so that the stones might not
hurt him in kneeling he laid them carefully down by his side on the
bank . This done , he stooped down to scoop up some water in his hand , and
then it happened that he pushed one stone a little too far , so that both
presently went plump into the water . Hans , as soon as he saw them
sinking to the bottom , jumped up for joy , and then kneeled down and
returned thanks , with tears in his eyes , that so mercifully , and without
any act on his part , and in so nice a way , he had been delivered from
the heavy stones , which alone hindered him from getting on . 

 " So lucky as I am , " exclaimed Hans ,  " is no other man under the sun ! " 

Then with a light heart , and free from every burden , he leaped gaily
along till he reached his mother ' s house . 


