The old-time Indians say that long , long ago , the Little People made a
law that stories must not be told in summer . 

Summer is the time for work . Bees must store their honey . Squirrels must
gather their nuts . Men must grow their corn . Trees and plants must leaf , 
and flower , and bear their fruit . 

If stories were told , plants , birds , animals , and men would stop their
work to listen . This would mean poor crops and hungry people . Animals
would forget to grow their winter coats and lay by their winter stores . 
Birds would fail to start in time for the South . 

The old Indians say that the story-teller who disobeys this law of _Jo
gah oh_ will suffer some misfortune . Winter is the time to tell the
stories , for then the work of animals , plants , and men is done , --and the
Little People are fast asleep . 

No , it is not safe to tell stories in summer . No one knows when a bird , 
or a bee , or a butterfly may be listening , and may tell the chief of the
Little People . Should the chief of the Little People be offended , he
might cause something dreadful to happen to the story-teller . 

Last summer , the writer of these stories came very near being changed
into an animal , --or something worse , --just for telling stories . So an
old Indian said . She does not know now how she escaped . She thinks it
must have been because she was a White Indian . This is how it happened . 

It was at the time of the Harvest Moon . _Yeh sen noh wehs_ spoke for one
of the tribes at their council house , and she told some of these wonder
stories . 

All went well until the middle of the night . Then a very old Indian
came to warn her of her danger . It seems that he had been at the council
in the evening , and had heard the stories told , many of which he knew . 

He told _Yeh sen noh wehs_ he had expected to see her change into
something else right then and there . He said he would not dare to tell a
story .  " No , no , me  ' fraid , evil come ! " he said . 

Then he wanted to know if _Yeh sen noh wehs_ was a real Indian . He had
been told that she was a White Indian , but when he heard her tell the
stories , he said , he thought she was a real Indian . 

When _Yeh sen noh wehs_ told him that she had not a drop of Indian blood
running in her veins , he looked very solemn . At last he spoke . He told
the interpreter to tell her , --for he spoke but a few words of
English , --that the Great Spirit made a snake , a snake; a fox , a fox; a
muskrat , a muskrat; a coon , a coon; a bear , a bear; an Indian , an
Indian; a White Indian , a White Indian . Each must be snake , fox , coon , 
bear , Indian or White Indian , as long as he lived . Each must be himself . 

Then the old man asked what disease _Yeh sen noh wehs_ had , that made
her go around with a feather in her hair , acting like a real Indian , if
she were a White Indian . 

_Yeh sen noh wehs_ had no answer . And she does not know to this day , 
what saved her from being changed into a rabbit , a katydid , or something
worse , by the chief of the Little People . She knows , however , that she
is very glad she is telling the stories to you , in the WINTER time . 


