But there came a day at last when Robin Hood had to bid farewell to
the greenwood where he and his merry men had spent so many happy
years . Word was sent to the king that the outlaws waxed more and more
insolent to his nobles and all those in authority , and that unless
their pride was quelled the land would be overrun . 

A council of state was therefore called , to consider what was best to
be done . Having consulted a whole summer ' s day , at length it was
agreed that some one should be sent to seize Robin Hood and bring him
before the king . 

A trusty and most worthy knight , called Sir William , was chosen for
this task . 

 " Go you hence to that insolent outlaw , Robin Hood , " said the king , 
 " and bid him surrender himself without more ado , or he and all his
crew shall suffer . Take a hundred valiant bowmen , all chosen men of
might , skilled in their art , and clad in glittering armour . " 

 " My sovereign liege , it shall be done , " said the knight .  " I ' ll venture
my blood against Robin Hood , and bring him alive or dead . " 

A hundred men were straightway chosen , as proper men as were ever
seen , and on midsummer day they marched forth to conquer the bold
outlaw . 

With long yew-bows and shining spears they marched in pomp and pride , 
and they never halted nor delayed till they came to the forest . 

 " Tarry here , and make ready your bows , that in case of need you may
follow me , " said the knight to his archers .  " And look you observe my
call . I will go first , in person , with the letters of our good king , 
duly signed and sealed , and if Robin Hood will surrender we need not
draw a string . " 

The knight wandered about the forest , till at length he came to the
tent of Robin Hood . He greeted the outlaw , and showed him the king ' s
letter , whereupon Robin sprang to his feet and stood on guard . 

 " They would have me surrender , then , and lie at their mercy ? " quoth
Robin .  " Tell them from me that shall never be while I have seven score
of good men . " 

Sir William , who was a bold and hardy knight , made an attempt to seize
Robin then and there , but Robin was too quick to be caught , and bade
him forbear such tricks . Then he set his horn to his mouth , and blew a
blast or two; the knight did the same . 

Instantly from all sides archers came running , some for Robin Hood , 
some for the knight . 

Sir William drew up his men with care , and placed them in battle
array . Robin Hood was no whit behind with his yeomen . The fray was
stern and bloody . The archers on both sides bent their bows , and
arrows flew in clouds . In the very first flight the gallant knight , 
Sir William , was slain; but nevertheless the fight went on with fury , 
and lasted from morning until almost noon . They fought till both
parties were spent , and only ceased when neither side had strength to
go on . Those of the king ' s archers that still remained went back to
London with right good will , and Robin Hood ' s men retreated to the
depths of the greenwood . 

But Robin Hood ' s last fight was fought , and of all the arrows that
ever he shot , there was but one yet to fly . As he left the field of
battle he was taken ill , and he felt his strength fail , and the fever
rise in his veins . 

His life was ebbing fast away , and now he was too weak to go on . 

Then he remembered his little bugle-horn , which still hung at his
side , and setting it to his mouth , he blew once , twice , and again--a
low , weak blast . 

Away in the greenwood , as he sat under a tree , Little John heard the
well-known call , but so faint and feeble was the sound it struck like
ice to his heart . 

 " I fear my master is near dead , he blows so wearily ! " 

Never after hart or hind ran Little John as he ran that day to answer
his master ' s dying call . He raced like the wind till he came to where
Robin was , and fell on his knee before him . 

 " Give me my bent bow in my hand , " said Robin Hood ,  " and I will let fly
a broad arrow , and where this arrow is taken up , there shall you dig
my grave . 

  " Lay me a green sod under my head , 
 And another at my feet;
 And lay my bent bow at my side , 
 Which was my music sweet;
 And make my grave of gravel and green , 
 Which is most right and meet . " 

So Robin Hood drew his bow for the last time , and there where the
arrow fell , under a clump of the greenwood trees , they dug the grave
as he had said , and buried him . 


