A fox was running through the wood near a river . He had a fish in his
mouth . 

The fish had been stolen from an Indian who lived down the stream . The
fox had been passing near the Indian ' s wigwam . He saw the fish hanging
by the fire . It was cleaned and ready to cook . 

 " What a tasty breakfast ! " thought the fox .  " I think I will watch the man
eat . " 

Soon the Indian went into the wigwam . The fox slipped up to the fire . He
seized the fish , and ran away with it . 

When the Indian came back , he had no breakfast . The fish was gone . No
fox was to be seen . 

The fox ran along , feeling much pleased with himself . 

 " What a cunning fox I am , " he chuckled .  " I will play another foxy trick . 
This time it shall be on the bear I see coming . " 

He ran up a tree that had been bent half way to earth by the West Wind . 
There he began to eat his fish . He smacked his lips so loudly that the
bear heard him . 

The bear stopped under the tree , and asked ,  " What are you eating that
tastes so good ? " 

For answer the fox threw down a bit of the fish . The bear smacked his
lips and cried ,  " More ! More ! " 

 " Go to the river , swim out to the big log , and catch your own fish , " 
called the fox .  " It ' s very easy ! Just drop your tail into the water . 
Hold it there till a fish comes along and bites , then pull it up . That
is the way I catch my fish . You can catch all the fish you want with
your own tail . " 

The bear hurried on to the river . He swam to the log and dropped his
tail into the water , as the fox had advised . 

All day he sat and fished with his tail , --for bears then had very long
tails . 

The sun set , but no fish had pulled his tail . All night the bear sat on
the log and fished . Cold North Wind blew his breath over the water . The
river grew still and white . 

Towards morning , the bear felt that his tail was getting very heavy . Now
at last he was sure he had a fish . He tried to pull it up . But alas ! his
tail was frozen fast in the ice . 

Then the fox came along . He laughed long and loudly at the bear , and
asked if the fishing was good . 

Some dogs heard the fox , and came tearing through the thick underbrush . 
They saw the fox and started after him . 

The fox slyly led them on to the frozen river toward the bear . The bear
saw them coming , and called to the fox to go around some other way . The
fox made believe he did not hear , and came straight on to the bear to
ask him what he had said . 

The dogs leaped upon the bear . The bear struggled . He gave one great
pull , and freed himself from the ice . He struck at the dogs so fiercely
with his great paws , that they soon left him , and went on after the fox . 

Dogs have been running after foxes ever since . 

When the bear got his breath , he stood up and looked around at his tail . 
He found he had only a small piece left . Most of his tail had been left
in the ice . 

This is why bears have short tails , and why dogs still love to chase the
fox . 




WHY HERMIT THRUSH IS SO SHY

Some moons after the council when the birds chose their feathered suits , 
a second council was called . The purpose of this council was to see
which bird could fly to heaven , and bring a song to earth . 

When all the birds had arrived and were perched upon the council tree , 
the wise old owl spoke . 

 " Friends and brothers , listen , " said the owl .  " Many of you have strong
wings , but your voices are not beautiful . High , high up in the sky , a
long trail beyond the clouds , is the Happy Hunting Ground . 

 " There live all our brothers of the wood , whom the Great Spirit has
called . They sing songs more beautiful than any heard on earth . 

 " The bird that can fly beyond the clouds will hear that singing . He
shall bring a song to earth . Who will fly the Great Sky Trail , and bring
a song to earth ? Who-whoo ! Who-whoo ! Who-whoo ! " 

At this , all the birds that were swift of wing flew high in the air . 
They circled round and round to show their skill . Then they disappeared
in the clouds . 

But one by one they dropped to earth; for when they had reached the
Great Sky Trail beyond the clouds , they were too tired to take it . 

At last the eagle arose and stretched his great wings . 

 " Listen , " he said ,  " for the Chief of Birds speaks . No other bird is so
swift and so strong as the eagle . He has circled the earth . He has flown
to the rim of the world . The eagle will fly the Great Sky Trail and
bring the song to earth . " 

A little brown thrush sat near the eagle . 

 " Oh , " he thought ,  " how I would like to bring that song to earth ! " 

But he was so small , and his wings were so tired ! 

Then an idea popped into the little brown head of the thrush . He hopped
softly to the back of the eagle , and hid in the thick feathers near the
neck . So small and light was the thrush , that the eagle did not feel his
weight . He did not know that the little brown thrush was on his
back , --and the other birds did not tell him . 

The eagle spread his great wings . Up , and up , and up , they soared . The
council wood became a little speck and then was seen no more . Over , and
under , and through the clouds , on , and on , and on , they sailed , along
the Great Sky Trail . 

At last the eagle ' s strength began to fail . He could go no further . The
great wings of the chief of birds could beat the air no longer . They
fell at his side . 

The little brown thrush felt the eagle quiver and begin to drop toward
the earth . 

Then away flew the little brown thrush . The air was so light it seemed
easy to fly . On and on he went , for he was not tired . He had had a ride
almost to heaven . 

 " Now , " he thought ,  " I will go on and will get the song . " 

For some time , the little brown thrush flew along the Great Sky Trail . 
All at once the air seemed full of song . He knew he was nearing the
Happy Hunting Ground . 

He listened . One song seemed more beautiful to him than the rest . Again
and again he listened . He caught the notes . He sang them many times , 
until he was sure that he could carry the song to earth . 

Then down , and down , and down , he floated , through clouds and storms and
sunshine , back to Mother Earth . 

Very happy , he flew toward the council wood . He was so full of his
beautiful song and the wonderful Sky Trail , he thought he must pour out
his song at once . 

But when he reached the council wood , he dared not open his mouth ! He
remembered that he had stolen his ride part way to heaven , --and he knew
the other birds knew it . 

But that song ! he must sing it ! He thought his throat would burst , if he
did not sing ! 

So the little brown thrush flew off by himself , into a deep , dark part
of the wood . There , hidden by the brush and the bushes , he poured forth
the song he had heard on the Great Sky Trail . 

Men hearing it to-day , say ,  " Listen , a hermit thrush ! What a beautiful
song ! But he is such a shy bird , one seldom can catch a glimpse of him . " 

They do not know why he keeps so close under cover . 


