At one time , the animals had tribes and chiefs , like men . It was when
the porcupine was chief , that a council was called . 

A great fire was lighted , for it was night . When all the animals were
seated around the fire , the porcupine spoke . 

 " Friends , " he said ,  " we have met here to settle a great question :  ' Shall
we have night all the time , or day ? ' " At this , all the animals began to
talk at once . There was great confusion . The night animals kept
shouting ,  " Night , night ! Always night ! " Others of the animals cried , 
 " Day , day ! Always day ! " Still others called for  " Day and night ! " 

There was so much noise that it could not be decided what was best . 

At last the animals grew tired of calling . One by one the voices grew
fainter , and the shouting ceased . Of the night animals , the voice of the
bear alone was heard . He had a big voice and still kept calling ,  " Night , 
night ! Always night ! " 

The animals who wanted day all the time , and those who wanted day and
night , also became quiet , --all except the chipmunk . He chattered on ,  " We
will have light--and then night . We will have light--and then night . 
Chee , chee , chee ! " 

Then the bear , too , became tired . He was fat and lazy , and so sleepy ! He
thought he would take a short nap . 

But all night long the wide-awake little chipmunk kept up his song . Not
for a moment did he stop to rest . Out of the dark came his voice , sure
and cheery ,  " We will have light--and then night . We will have
light--and then night ! Chee , chee , chee ! " 

And before the animals knew it , the sun began to rise . 

At the first rays of light , the bear sat up , blinked , and rubbed his
eyes . He saw that while he had slept , light had indeed come . He knew
that he and the night animals had been beaten in the council , and that
the chipmunk and the animals who wanted day and night had won . 

The bear was very angry . He struck at the chipmunk with his paw . But he
was clumsy , and the chipmunk was spry ! 

The chipmunk laughed and sprang into a hole of a hollow tree near by . 
But those black stripes on the chipmunk ' s back show where the paw of the
black bear touched him as he slipped into the tree . 

Ever since this council , and the little chipmunk called so long and loud
for  " light and night , " we have had day and night . 




HOW TWO INDIAN BOYS SETTLED A QUARREL

Flying Squirrel and Lightning Bow were two little Indian boys . They
lived by Singing River , and they played from sunrise to sunset . They
were as happy as the day was long . 

In the summer , they fished and swam in Singing River , and they shot
their arrows into chipmunk and woodpecker holes . Sometimes they played
 " Dodging Arrows , " a game their mother had taught them when they were
very young . 

In the winter , they jumped into fleecy snowdrifts and rolled until their
little bronze bodies took on a red-raspberry tint . Then they would send
their snow-snakes skimming over the hard crust of snow . 

Snow-snakes were small rods of wood , polished smooth with resin , oil , or
wax . They could be thrown long distances . Long Moose--Lightning Bow and
Flying Squirrel ' s father--could throw a snow-snake a mile and a half , 
over the crust of the snow . But the snow-snakes he used were eight feet
long and tipped with lead . 

It was the Moon of Berries . Six times had Flying Squirrel and Lightning
Bow seen the Berry Moon hang her horn in the night sky . And not once in
all their lives had they quarreled . 

One morning , Flying Squirrel and Lightning Bow planned a foot race . 
Seven times they were to run . Three times , Flying Squirrel had made the
goal first . Three times , Lightning Bow had outrun him . The seventh race
was claimed by each . No one saw them run , so no one could decide the
game . And they fell to quarreling . 
Louder and louder their voices were raised . More and more angry they
grew . 

White Fawn , their mother , was baking corn bread on the coals of the
wigwam fire . The angry voices reached her ears . She stepped to the door . 

 " For shame ! " she called .  " Go and set up your sticks . " 

Then she showed Lightning Bow and Flying Squirrel how to set up three
sticks so they would stand for many days . 

 " Now go into the wood , set up your sticks , and leave your quarrel
there , " she said .  " When the Berry Moon has passed , you shall return and
see if the sticks are still standing . 

 " If they lean toward the rising sun , Lightning Bow was right . If they
lean toward the setting sun , Flying Squirrel won . If they have fallen
down , neither was right and neither won . " 

Lightning Bow and Flying Squirrel went into the wood and set up their
sticks . Then they began to throw balls with willow wands , and soon they
were happy again . 

 * * * * *

The sun had risen and set many times . The Berry Moon had passed . It was
the Thunder Moon , when White Fawn said to Lightning Bow and Flying
Squirrel ,  " Today you may go into the wood and see if your sticks are
still standing . " 

Hand in hand , the two little Indian boys ran into the wood . They found
only a heap of rotting sticks . 

Flying Squirrel and Lightning Bow stood and looked at the sticks . They
thought and thought . 

 " What did we set up the sticks for ? " each asked of the other . 

And for the life of them they could not remember what they had quarreled
about , and why they had set up the sticks ! 


