Once a tribe of the Iroquois became very warlike and cruel . They liked
to follow the warpath rather than the hunting trails . 

These warriors thought only of the war dance . They forgot to give thanks
for the sweet waters of the maple , and for the planting season . Neither
did they remember to praise the Great Spirit , in song and dance , for the
juicy strawberries , and the waving green corn , as once they had done . 

To fight was the one desire of their lives , the one thought that filled
their minds . They boasted that none were so fierce and bloodthirsty as
they . 

 " Our arrows fall like leaves of the pine , " they said ,  " and always are
they red with blood . Our war shirts have many scalp locks on them . " 

One day , a dispute arose with a neighboring tribe of their nation . The
Peace Wigwam was not far away , but these warriors would not take their
quarrel to it , as was the custom . The fighting Indians would have none
of the Peace Wigwam . 

 " Let the women and papooses sit in the sun at the door of the Peace
Wigwam , " they said scornfully .  " Chiefs are for the warpath . " 

A fierce cry was raised , and the war dance was begun . The chiefs painted
their bodies , donned their war shirts , sharpened their tomahawks , tipped
their arrows , and tightened their bowstrings . 

But by the time they had made ready , the sun had set , and the blanket of
darkness had fallen upon them . A council was quickly called . It was
decided that they would not start to war until moonrise . So the warriors
lay down to sleep . 

As they slept , another council was called . This was not a council of
men , but of mice . 

From long and short trails they came , hundreds and hundreds of mice , for
all had heard the warriors boast of their strength . 

 " Now , " said the mice ,  " we will show these boasters how weak are men , 
and how strong are little mice . " 

When all the mice were gathered about the council tree , the leader spoke
thus :  " My brothers , listen ! The Great Spirit did not give men strength , 
that they should fight and kill one another . The Great Spirit did not
make men powerful , that they should strike down and kill the weaker
animals . Let us show these fierce warriors that it is the weak who are
strong , and the strong who are weak . Let every mouse destroy at least
one weapon before the moon shall rise . " 

At this , all the mice set to work . Snap , snap , snap , went the bowstrings
on all sides . Then the sharp little teeth began on the feathers that
winged the poisoned arrows . Soon the feathers lay in bits about the
ground . 

Next , the deerskin cords that bound the sling shots were cut in two , and
before the moon had risen , every weapon had been made useless; every
Indian had been disarmed , --and the mice had scampered away . 

The warriors awoke . Again the war cry was raised . They sprang to their
feet and seized their weapons , but found them useless . Their bows had no
strings; their arrows , no wings; their slings , no cords . 

The warriors who boasted that they were the strongest and fiercest on
the earth , had been made powerless by mice . 


