After the Great Spirit had made the Red Children and had given them this
beautiful land in which to live , he sent them a great gift , --the gift of
the corn . 

_Ga gaah_ , the Crow , claims it was he who brought this gift . He says he
was called to the wigwam of the Great Spirit in the sky . A grain of corn
was placed in his ear , and he was told to carry it to earth , to the Red
Children . 

Therefore , as _Ga gaah_ brought the gift , he claims he has a right to
pull what corn he needs . _Ga gaah_ says he does not  " steal " corn . He
simply takes what belongs to him , his rightful share . 

And surely _Ga gaah_ is not greedy ! He never takes more corn than he
wants for himself . He never hides or stores it away . He takes just what
he wishes to eat at the time , and no more , for crows never think of
to-morrow . 

In summer , they are happy in the cornfields , guarding the roots from
insect enemies , and pulling the tender blades whenever they are hungry . 

But when winter comes , the crows are sad . Many councils are held . 
Sometimes a council tree will be black with crows . All are so poor and
so hungry , that they get together to try to plan a better way to live . 

There is much noise and confusion at a crow council , for all the crows
talk at once . All are saying ,  " No bird is so poor as the crow; he is
always hungry . Next summer , let us plant and raise a big crop of corn , 
and gather and save it for the winter . Next winter , crows will not be
hungry; they will have food . 

 " We will no longer take from the fields of the Red Children just enough
corn for a meal to-day . We will raise our own corn , and lay by a store
for the winter . " 

And having agreed that this is a wise plan , the council ends . 

A few days later , another council will be called . At this , the crows
will plan how and where to plant the corn . Some will be appointed to
select a field , others to find seed , and still others to plant and tend
the corn . 

But , alas ! When spring comes , and skies are blue , and the sun shines
warm , the crows forget the hunger of the winter , and the councils in the
tree . They remember only that the skies are blue , and the sun shines
warm , and now there is plenty of corn . 

Happy and content , they walk up and down the fields of the Red Children . 

 " We have all we want to-day , " they say ,  " Why should we think of
to-morrow , or next winter ? We had a good meal this morning , and we are
sure of one to-night . Is not this enough for a crow ? What more can he
ask ? " 

And the next winter comes , and finds the crows as poor and as hungry as
they were the last . Again they are holding noisy councils in the council
tree . Again they are laying plans for the great crop of corn that they
will raise next summer ! 


