Once a rabbit began to run back and forth through the woods , calling for
snow , snow , snow ! It was one of those large gray rabbits , with long
ears , that people call hares . 

As this hare ran back and forth through the woods , he sang at the top of
his voice ,  " _Ah gon ne yah--yeh ! Ah gon ne yah-yeh ! Ah gon ne yah--yeh ! 
dah gen , dah ton , Ah gon ne yah--yeh ! Ah gon ne yah--yeh ! _ " This meant , 
 " Snow , snow , snow ! How I would run if I had snow ! Snow , snow , snow ! How
I would run if I had snow ! " 

Now , strange as it may seem , as this hare ran back and forth singing for
snow , snow , snow , some flakes of snow began to fall . The hare was so
delighted that he jumped up and down for joy . 

 " _Ah gon ne yah--yeh ! Ah gon ne yah--yeh ! Ah gon ne yah--yeh ! _ " he sang , 
in short , quick notes of joy . And the higher he jumped , and the louder
he sang , the faster and thicker the snow came . 

The hare was so delighted that he again began to run . All day long he
ran , back and forth through the woods , calling for  " Snow , snow , snow ! 
How I would run if I had snow ! " And the snow fell faster and faster . 
Thicker and thicker it came . The path in which the rabbit ran grew
higher and higher , as the snow fell deeper and deeper . 

But at last the hare was so tired that he could run no longer . He no
longer sang for  " Snow , snow , snow ! How I would run if I had snow , " for
he now had more snow than he wanted . The snow was up to the tiptops of
the trees , and it was very hard to run . 

The hare was very tired . He thought he must take a rest . Night was
coming on . He looked about him . Near the path were the top branches of a
willow tree , sticking out above the snow . He sprang into a crotch of
those branches . There he could sit and rest for a time . Soon he fell
asleep . He slept all night and part of the next day . 

That night it began to rain , and it rained very , very hard . The snow
began to melt , and it melted very , very fast , and when that hare awoke , 
not a flake of snow was to be seen ! 

But there was the hare away up in the tiptop of that willow tree ! What
to do he did not know . He was very hungry . He wondered how long he could
stay there and not starve . He saw some tender buds on the branches . He
ate those , and then he gnawed bark for a time . 

However , sooner or later , the hare knew he must jump or starve . He
looked down at the earth . It looked very good to him . He could see some
fresh green moss and some beautiful grass . One jump , and they were his ! 
But what a jump ! 

At last the hare whipped his courage up to the jumping point . He shut
his eyes , and gave one great jump to earth . But when he jumped , he
caught his tail on the branch of the willow tree and left part of it up
there . And when he jumped , he struck the front of his face on a sharp
stone , and the stone split his upper lip in two . 

Ever since then , hares have had split lips and short tails , and ever
since then , willow trees have had tails , or catkins , on them , in the
spring . 


