Many times had the Feast of Pentecost come round , and many were the
knights that Arthur had made after he founded the Order of the Round
Table; yet no knight had appeared who dared claim the seat named by
Merlin the Siege Perilous . At last , one vigil of the great feast , a
lady came to Arthur ' s court at Camelot and asked Sir Launcelot to
ride with her into the forest hard by , for a purpose not then to be
revealed . Launcelot consenting , they rode together until they came
to a nunnery hidden deep in the forest; and there the lady bade
Launcelot dismount , and led him into a great and stately room . 
Presently there entered twelve nuns and with them a youth , the
fairest that Launcelot had ever seen .  " Sir , " said the nuns ,  " we have
brought up this child in our midst , and now that he is grown to
manhood , we pray you make him knight , for of none worthier could he
receive the honour . "  " Is this thy own desire ? " asked Launcelot of
the young squire; and when he said that so it was , Launcelot
promised to make him knight after the great festival had been
celebrated in the church next day . 

So on the morrow , after they had worshipped , Launcelot knighted
Galahad--for that was the youth ' s name--and asked him if he would
ride at once with him to the King ' s court; but the young knight
excusing himself , Sir Launcelot rode back alone to Camelot , where
all rejoiced that he was returned in time to keep the feast with the
whole Order of the Round Table . 

Now , according to his custom , King Arthur was waiting for some
marvel to befall before he and his knights sat down to the banquet . 
Presently a squire entered the hall and said :  " Sir King , a great
wonder has appeared . There floats on the river a mighty stone , as it
were a block of red marble , and it is thrust through by a sword , the
hilt of which is set thick with precious stones . " On hearing this , 
the King and all his knights went forth to view the stone and found
it as the squire had said; moreover , looking closer , they read these
words :  " None shall draw me hence , but only he by whose side I must
hang; and he shall be the best knight in all the world . " 
Immediately , all bade Launcelot draw forth the sword , but he
refused , saying that the sword was not for him . Then , at the King ' s
command , Sir Gawain made the attempt and failed , as did Sir
Percivale after him . So the knights knew the adventure was not for
them , and returning to the hall , took their places about the Round
Table . 

No sooner were they seated than an aged man , clothed all in white , 
entered the hall , followed by a young knight in red armour , by whose
side hung an empty scabbard . The old man approached King Arthur and
bowing low before him , said :  " Sir , I bring you a young knight of the
house and lineage of Joseph of Arimathea , and through him shall
great glory be won for all the land of Britain . " Greatly did King
Arthur rejoice to hear this , and welcomed the two right royally . 
Then when the young knight had saluted the King , the old man led him
to the Siege Perilous and drew off its silken cover; and all the
knights were amazed , for they saw that where had been engraved the
words ,  " The Siege Perilous , " was written now in shining gold :  " This
is the Siege of the noble prince , Sir Galahad . " Straightway the
young man seated himself there where none other had ever sat without
danger to his life; and all who saw it said , one to another :  " Surely
this is he that shall achieve the Holy Grail . " Now the Holy Grail
was the blessed dish from which our Lord had eaten the Last Supper , 
and it had been brought to the land of Britain by Joseph of
Arimathea; but because of men ' s sinfulness , it had been withdrawn
from human sight , only that , from time to to time , it appeared to
the pure in heart . 

When all had partaken of the royal banquet , King Arthur bade Sir
Galahad come with him to the river ' s brink; and showing him the
floating stone with the sword thrust through it , told him how his
knights had failed to draw forth the sword .  " Sir , " said Galahad ,  " it
is no marvel that they failed , for the adventure was meant for me , 
as my empty scabbard shows . " So saying , lightly he drew the sword
from the heart of the stone , and lightly he slid it into the
scabbard at his side . While all yet wondered at this adventure of
the sword , there came riding to them a lady on a white palfrey who , 
saluting King Arthur , said :  " Sir King , Nacien the hermit sends thee
word that this day shall great honour be shown to thee and all thine
house; for the Holy Grail shall appear in thy hall , and thou and all
thy fellowship shall be fed therefrom . " And so to Launcelot she
said :  " Sir Knight , thou hast ever been the best knight of all the
world; but another has come to whom thou must yield precedence . " 
Then Launcelot answered humbly :  " I know well I was never the best . " 
 " Ay , of a truth thou wast and art still , of sinful men , " said she , 
and rode away before any could question her further . 

So , that evening , when all were gathered about the Round Table , each
knight in his own siege , suddenly there was heard a crash of
thunder , so mighty that the hall trembled , and there flashed into
the hall a sunbeam , brighter far than any that had ever before been
seen; and then , draped all in white samite , there glided through the
air what none might see , yet what all knew to be the Holy Grail . And
all the air was filled with sweet odours , and on every one was shed
a light in which he looked fairer and nobler than ever before . So
they sat in an amazed silence , till presently King Arthur rose and
gave thanks to God for the grace given to him and to his court . Then
up sprang Sir Gawain and made his avow to follow for a year and a
day the Quest of the Holy Grail , if perchance he might be granted
the vision of it . Immediately other of the knights followed his
example , binding themselves to the Quest of the Holy Grail until , in
all , one hundred and fifty had vowed themselves to the adventure . 

Then was King Arthur grieved , for he foresaw the ruin of his noble
Order . And turning to Sir Gawain , he said :  " Nephew , ye have done
ill , for through you I am bereft of the noblest company of knights
that ever brought honour to any realm in Christendom . Well I know
that never again shall all of you gather in this hall , and it
grieves me to lose men I have loved as my life and through whom I
have won peace and righteousness for all my realm . " So the King
mourned and his knights with him , but their oaths they could not
recall . 

Great woe was there in Camelot next day when , after worship in the
cathedral , the knights who had vowed themselves to the Quest of the
Holy Grail got to horse and rode away . A goodly company it was that
passed through the streets , the townfolk weeping to see them go; Sir
Launcelot du Lac and his kin , Sir Galahad of whom all expected great
deeds , Sir Bors and Sir Percivale , and many another scarcely less
famed than they . So they rode together that day to the Castle of
Vagon , where they were entertained right hospitably , and the next
day they separated , each to ride his own way and see what adventures
should befall him . 

So it came to pass that , after four days ' ride , Sir Galahad reached
an abbey . Now Sir Galahad was still clothed in red armour as when he
came to the King ' s court , and by his side hung the wondrous sword;
but he was without a shield . They of the abbey received him right
heartily , as also did the brave King Bagdemagus , Knight of the Round
Table , who was resting there . When they greeted each other , Sir
Galahad asked King Bagdemagus what adventure had brought him there . 
 " Sir , " said Bagdemagus ,  " I was told that in this abbey was preserved
a wondrous shield which none but the best knight in the world might
bear without grievous harm to himself . And though I know well that
there are better knights than I , to-morrow I purpose to make the
attempt . But , I pray you , bide at this monastery a while until you
hear from me; and if I fail , do ye take the adventure upon you . "  " So
be it , " said Sir Galahad . 

The next day , at their request , Sir Galahad and King Bagdemagus were
led into the church by a monk and shown where , behind the altar , 
hung the wondrous shield , whiter than snow save for the blood-red
cross in its midst . Then the monk warned them of the danger to any
who , being unworthy , should dare to bear the shield . But King
Bagdemagus made answer :  " I know well that I am not the best knight
in the world , yet will I try if I may bear it . " So he hung it about
his neck , and , bidding farewell , rode away with his squire . 

The two had not journeyed far before they saw a knight approach , 
armed all in white mail and mounted upon a white horse . Immediately
he laid his spear in rest and , charging King Bagdemagus , pierced him
through the shoulder and bore him from his horse; and standing over
the wounded knight , he said :  " Knight , thou hast shown great folly , 
for none shall bear this shield save the peerless knight , Sir
Galahad . " Then , taking the shield , he gave it to the squire and
said :  " Bear this shield to the good Knight Galahad and greet him
well from me . "  " What is your name ? " asked the squire .  " That is not
for thee or any other to know . "  " One thing , I pray you , " said the
squire;  " why may this shield be borne by none but Sir Galahad
without danger ? "  " Because it belongs to him only , " answered the
stranger knight , and vanished . 

Then the squire took the shield and setting King Bagdemagus on his
horse , bore him back to the abbey where he lay long , sick unto
death . To Galahad the squire gave the shield and told him all that
had befallen . So Galahad hung the shield about his neck and rode the
way that Bagdemagus had gone the day before; and presently he met
the White Knight , whom he greeted courteously , begging that he would
make known to him the marvels of the red-cross shield .  " That will I
gladly , " answered the White Knight .  " Ye must know , Sir Knight , that
this shield was made and given by Joseph of Arimathea to the good
King Evelake of Sarras , that , in the might of the holy symbol , he
should overthrow the heathen who threatened his kingdom . But
afterwards , King Evelake followed Joseph to this land of Britain
where they taught the true faith unto the people who before were
heathen . Then when Joseph lay dying , he bade King Evelake set the
shield in the monastery where ye lay last night , and foretold that
none should wear it without loss until that day when it should be
taken by the knight , ninth and last in descent from him , who should
come to that place the fifteenth day after receiving the degree of
knighthood . Even so has it been with you , Sir Knight . " So saying , 
the unknown knight disappeared and Sir Galahad rode on his way . 

After Sir Launcelot had parted from his fellows at the Castle of
Vagon , he rode many days through the forest without adventure , till
he chanced upon a knight close by a little hermitage in the wood . 
Immediately , as was the wont of errant knights , they prepared to
joust , and Launcelot , whom none before had overthrown , was borne
down , man and horse , by the stranger knight . Thereupon a nun , who
dwelt in the hermitage , cried :  " God be with thee , best knight in all
this world , " for she knew the victor for Sir Galahad . But Galahad , 
not wishing to be known , rode swiftly away; and presently Sir
Launcelot got to horse again and rode slowly on his way , shamed and
doubting sorely in his heart whether this quest were meant for him . 

Afterward Sir Galahad rescued Sir Percivale from twenty knights who
beset him , and rode on his way till night-fall , when he sought
shelter at a little hermitage . Thither there came in the night a
damsel who desired to speak with Sir Galahad; so he arose and went
to her .  " Galahad , " said she ,  " arm you and mount your horse and
follow me , for I am come to guide you in your quest . " So they rode
together until they had come to the seashore and there the damsel
showed Galahad a great ship into which he must enter . Then she bade
him farewell , and he , going on to the ship , found there already the
good knights Sir Bors and Sir Percivale , who made much joy of the
meeting . They abode in that ship until they had come to the castle
of King Pelles , who welcomed them right gladly . Then , as they all
sat at supper that night , suddenly the hall was filled with a great
light , and the holy vessel appeared in their midst , covered all in
white samite . While they all rejoiced , there came a voice , saying : 
 " My Knights whom I have chosen , ye have seen the holy vessel dimly . 
Continue your journey to the city of Sarras and there the perfect
vision shall be yours . " 

Now in the city of Sarras had dwelt a long time Joseph of Arimathea , 
teaching its people the true faith , before ever he came into the
land of Britain; but when Sir Galahad and his fellows came there
after long voyage , they found it ruled by a heathen King named
Estorause , who cast them into a deep dungeon . There they were kept a
year , but at the end of that time , the tyrant died . Then the great
men of the land gathered together to consider who should be their
King; and , while they were in council , came a voice bidding them
take as their King the youngest of the three knights whom Estorause
had thrown into prison . So in fear and wonder they hastened to the
prison , and , releasing the three knights , made Galahad King as the
voice had bidden them . 

Thus Sir Galahad became King of the famous city of Sarras , in far
Babylon . He had reigned a year when , one morning early , he and the
other two knights , his fellows , went into the chapel , and there they
saw , kneeling in prayer , an aged man , robed as a bishop , and round
him hovered many angels . The knights fell on their knees in awe and
reverence , whereupon he that seemed a bishop turned to them and
said :  " I am Joseph of Arimathea , and I am come to show you the
perfect vision of the Holy Grail . " On the instant there appeared
before them , without veil or cover , the holy vessel , in a radiance
of light such as almost blinded them . Sir Bors and Sir Percivale , 
when at length they were recovered from the brightness of that
glory , looked up to find that the holy Joseph and the wondrous
vessel had passed from their sight . Then they went to Sir Galahad
where he still knelt as in prayer , and behold , he was dead; for it
had been with him even as he had prayed; in the moment when he had
seen the vision , his soul had gone back to God . 

So the two knights buried him in that far city , themselves mourning
and all the people with them . And immediately after , Sir Percivale
put off his arms and took the habit of a monk , living a devout and
holy life until , a year and two months later , he also died and was
buried near Sir Galahad . Then Sir Bors armed him , and bidding
farewell to the city , sailed away until , after many weeks , he came
again to the land of Britain . There he took horse , and stayed not
till he had come to Camelot . Great was the rejoicing of Arthur and
all his knights when Sir Bors was once more among them . When he had
told all the adventures which had befallen him and the good knights , 
his companions , all who heard were filled with amaze . But the King
he caused the wisest clerks in the land to write in great books of
the Holy Grail , that the fame of it should endure unto all time . 


