Once the Little People , the Indian fairies , ran with the Red Children
through the woods , and played with them beside the streams . Now they are
not often seen , for the white man drove them out of the woods with the
Indians , and away from the waters , with his big steam noises . 

But before steamboats and great mills were on the streams , the Little
People were there . They were often seen paddling their tiny canoes , or
sliding down the great rocks on the banks . They loved to slide down a
bank where one rock jutted out , for then they had a big bounce . They
also liked to sport and jump with the fish . 

There was a young Indian girl whose name was Morning Star . She was
called Morning Star because her face was so bright , and she was always
up early in the morning . 

Morning Star lived with her father in a comfortable wigwam by a river . 
Every day she would get up with the sun , and run down to the river where
the great rocks were , to catch fish for breakfast . 

Morning Star caught her fish in a basket . At night , she would go and
fasten her basket between the rocks , in a narrow place of the stream . 
Then , when the fish swam through in the night , they would get caught in
it , and Morning Star would find plenty of fish waiting for her . In the
morning , she would take the basket of fish back to the wigwam , and soon
the smell of fish frying on hot coals would come from the lodge . 

Never since Morning Star began to fish with her basket , had Chief Little
Wolf , her father , had to wait for his fish breakfast before starting on
the chase . But one morning , neither Chief Little Wolf nor Morning Star
breakfasted on fish . This is how it happened . 

On this morning , the Indian girl was up as usual with the sun . She ran
down the river just as the Great Spirit lifted the sun ' s smiling face . 
Morning Star had such a light heart that she was glad just to be alive , 
and she sang a song of praise as she ran . All true Indians at sunrise
lift their arms and faces to the sun , and thank the Great Spirit that he
has smiled upon them again . 

Happy and fleet as a deer , Morning Star ran on until she came to the
great rocks . There she saw a whole tribe of tiny little folk gathered
about her basket . Some of them were perched on the sides of the basket , 
laughing and singing . Others were lifting the fish from it and throwing
them into the stream . Still others were opening and closing the splints
of the basket for the fish to slip through . 

Morning Star knew that these tiny folk were the _Jo gah oh_ . She knew
also that these Little People were friends of the fish . They know every
twist of a fish net and every turn of a hook . Often they have been known
to set fish free , and to guide them into deep , quiet places , far away
from the men who fish . 

Morning Star called to the Little People and begged them not to let all
the fish go . Then she began to climb down the rocks , as fast as she
could . The little Chief called up to her ,  " Fish , like Indian girls , like
to be alive . " 

Then he told the Little People to keep on setting the fish free . 

When Morning Star reached her basket , a few fish were still in it . She
put out her hand to take them from the Little People , --and not a fish , 
nor a _Jo gah oh_ was to be seen . The Little People had darted into
the rocks , for they go through anything , and the fish had slipped
through the tiny spaces between the splints of the basket . 

Morning Star heard the laughter of the Little People echo deep within
the rocks , for they like to play pranks with the earth children . And far
down the stream , she saw the fish leap with joy at being still alive . 
She took up her empty basket and went back to the wigwam . 

That morning for breakfast , Morning Star baked corn cakes on the hot
coals . As she ate the hot cakes , she thought they tasted almost as good
as fish . 

Ever after , when Morning Star saw a fish leap from the stream , she
remembered what the _Jo gah oh_ had said :  " Fish , like Indian girls , like
to be alive . " 


