Once a little Indian girl was very sad and unhappy . The Great Spirit had
taken her father and mother , and she had gone to live with relatives who
did not want her . Often she went to sleep hungry , for only the scraps of
food that were left from a meal were given to her . 

One day , the relatives of the little girl brought in a fine deer from
the chase , and made ready for a feast . They told the girl to get out of
the lodge , for there was neither room , nor meat for her . 

The little girl ran and hid herself in a great field of corn . There she
cried aloud . 

Soon a band of strange Little People gathered about her , to comfort her . 
On all sides , from the folds of the green cornstalks they came . 

They stroked her head , wiped the tears from her eyes , and said ,  " Don ' t
cry , little girl . We will take care of you . You shall come and live with
us . We will make a feast for you . We know why you are sad , for we can
read the thoughts of all the earth children . Come with us , and we will
show you more wonderful things than you have ever seen . " 

At this the little girl dried her tears , and smiled at the kind Little
People . 

 " You are very good to me , " she said .  " Who are you ? " 

 " We are the _Jo gah oh_ , " they replied ,  " the Little People . Come , and we
will show you what we can do . " 

Then they slipped some winged moccasins upon her feet . They wrapped her
in an invisible blanket and put a magic corn plume in her hair , and the
next moment all were flying through the air . 

They flew to a ledge of great rocks . At the touch of the Little People , 
the rocks opened , and they passed within . 

The girl found herself in a beautiful lodge . Kind _Jo gah oh_ mothers
were baking cakes and roasting meat . They welcomed the girl , and soon a
feast was spread in her honor . 

Now the heart of the little girl was so light that she danced with joy . 

 " What wonderful people you are ! Can you go anywhere , or do anything you
wish ? " 

 " Yes , " said the little chief ,  " the _Jo gah oh_ are small , but they are
great . Come with us , and you shall see what we can do . " 

Again they were flying through the air . Soon they reached the lodge
where the little girl had lived . It was night , and her relatives were
asleep , but she could see the deer that hung outside ready for the
feast . 

 " Now , " said the _Jo gah oh_ chief ,  " we will call out a pack of wolves
from the wood yonder , and there will be no fat deer for this selfish
feast , at sunrise . " 

Now no wolves had been seen in that wood for many moons . But at the call
of the fairies , a pack sprang from it , ran to the lodge , seized the
deer , and tore it into shreds . Then they again disappeared in the wood . 

The little girl ' s eyes were large now with wonder , as they flew back to
the fairy lodge in the rocks , but she was not afraid of these strange
Little People . She was so happy with them she wished she might always
live in a _Jo gah oh_ lodge . 

One morning , the little chief said ,  " Today we shall see more wonders . " 

This time a tiny canoe was waiting . They stepped into it and sailed
down a river until they came to a great tree . 

 " In that tree , " said the little chief ,  " lives a great , black bear . Every
day he comes out that door you see high up in the bear tree . I will make
the door fast so he cannot open it . A deep sleep will fall on him . He
will sleep for many moons . " 

Then the chief threw three stones through the open door of the bear
tree . Each time , a flame spread like a blanket over the door . A growling
and scratching was heard within . Then all became still . 

 " Now , " said the chief ,  " the bear will sleep until I call him in the
spring . He is locked up for the winter . Come , let us go on . " 

The little girl drew her invisible blanket closer , as the canoe went
sailing with the birds through the clouds . The birds that were swift of
wing called loudly for a race . 

 " Come on ! " said the fairy chief . 

Then he spread wide the invisible sails of his canoe , and they flew past
the birds like a streak of lightning . Even the eagle was left far
behind . They seemed to shoot through the sky . 

And , oh , what fun it was to be a bird ! The little girl would have sailed
on forever , but the little chief said ,  " You shall now return to your
people . We have given them soft hearts and kind minds . They are calling
for you . They will be glad to see you . " 

And soon the little girl was again in the wigwam of her relatives , 
sitting by the warm fire . 

They greeted her with joy , spread a soft skin for her to sit upon , and
gave her the best food . And the little girl lived with them , ever after , 
and was happy . ﻿

CHAPTER I


WIGWAM LEGEND OF HIAWATHA [ : This story is ascribed to Abraham
le Fort , an Onondaga chief , a graduate of Geneva College . The poem of
Longfellow has given it general interest . Hiawatha is an example of the
intellectual capacity of one of that race of whom it has been said  " Take
these Indians in their owne trimme and naturall disposition , and they
bee reported to bee wise , lofty spirited , constant in friendship to one
another : true in their promise , and more industrious than many
others . " --Wood ' s ,  " New England ' s Prospect , " London , 1634 . ]


On the banks of Tioto , or Cross Lake , resided an eminent man who bore
the name of Hiawatha , or the Wise Man . 

This name was given him , as its meaning indicates , on account of his
great wisdom in council and power in war . Hiawatha was of high and
mysterious origin . He had a canoe which would move without paddles , 
obedient to his will , and which he kept with great care and never used
except when he attended the general council of the tribes . It was from
Hiawatha the people learned to raise corn and beans; through his
instructions they were enabled to remove obstructions from the water
courses and clear their fishing grounds; and by him they were helped to
get the mastery over the great monsters which overran the country . The
people listened to him with ever increasing delight; and he gave them
wise laws and maxims from the Great Spirit , for he had been second to
him only in power previous to his taking up his dwelling with mankind . 

Having selected the Onondagas for his tribe , years passed away in
prosperity; the Onondagas assumed an elevated rank for their wisdom and
learning , among the other tribes , and there was not one of these which
did not yield its assent to their superior privilege of lighting the
council-fire . 

But in the midst of the high tide of their prosperity , suddenly there
arose a great alarm at the invasion of a ferocious band of warriors from
the North of the Great Lakes; and as these bands advanced , an
indiscriminate slaughter was made of men , women , and children . 
Destruction fell upon all alike . 

The public alarm was great; and Hiawatha advised them not to waste their
efforts in a desultory manner , but to call a council of all the tribes
that could be gathered together , from the East to the West; and , at the
same time , he appointed a meeting to take place on an eminence on the
banks of the Onondaga Lake . There , accordingly , the chief men assembled , 
while the occasion brought together a vast multitude of men , women , and
children , who were in expectation of some marvellous deliverance . 

Three days elapsed , and Hiawatha did not appear . The multitude began to
fear that he was not coming , and messengers were despatched for him to
Tioto , who found him depressed with a presentiment that evil would
follow his attendance . These fears were overruled by the eager
persuasions of the messengers; and Hiawatha , taking his daughter with
him , put his wonderful canoe in its element and set out for the council . 
The grand assemblage that was to avert the threatened danger appeared
quickly in sight , as he moved rapidly along in his magic canoe; and when
the people saw him , they sent up loud shouts of welcome until the
venerated man landed . A steep ascent led up the banks of the lake to the
place occupied by the council; and , as he walked up , a loud whirring
sound was heard above , as if caused by some rushing current of air . 
Instantly , the eyes of all were directed upward to the sky , where was
seen a dark spot , something like a small cloud , descending rapidly , and
as it approached , enlarging in its size and increasing in velocity . 
Terror and alarm filled the minds of the multitude and they scattered in
confusion . But as soon as he had gained the eminence , Hiawatha stood
still , causing his daughter to do the same--deeming it cowardly to fly , 
and impossible , if it was attempted , to divert the designs of the Great
Spirit . The descending object now assumed a more definite aspect; and , 
as it came nearer , revealed the shape of a gigantic white bird , with
wide-extended and pointed wings . This bird came down with ever
increasing velocity , until , with a mighty swoop , it dropped upon the
girl , crushing her at once to the earth . 

The fixed face of Hiawatha alone indicated his consciousness of his
daughter ' s death; while in silence he signalled to the warriors , who had
stood watching the event in speechless consternation . One after the
other stepped up to the prostrate bird , which was killed by its violent
fall , and selecting a feather from its snow-white plumage , decorated
himself therewith . [ : Since this event , say the Indians of this
tribe , the plumage of the white heron has been used for their
decorations on the war-path . ]

But now a new affliction fell upon Hiawatha; for , on removing the
carcass of the bird , not a trace could be discovered of his daughter . 
Her body had vanished from the earth . Shades of anguish contracted the
dark face of Hiawatha . He stood apart in voiceless grief . No word was
spoken . His people waited in silence , until at length arousing himself , 
he turned to them and walked in calm dignity to the head of the council . 

The first day he listened with attentive gravity to the plans of the
different speakers; on the next day he arose and said :  " My friends and
brothers; you are members of many tribes , and have come from a great
distance . We have come to promote the common interest , and our mutual
safety . How shall it be accomplished ? To oppose these Northern hordes in
tribes singly , while we are at variance often with each other , is
impossible . By uniting in a common band of brotherhood we may hope to
succeed . Let this be done , and we shall drive the enemy from our land . 
Listen to me by tribes . You , the Mohawks , who are sitting under the
shadow of the great tree , whose branches spread wide around , and whose
roots sink deep into the earth , shall be the first nation , because you
are warlike and mighty . You , the Oneidas , who recline your bodies
against the everlasting stone that cannot be moved , shall be the second
nation , because you always give wise counsel . You , the Onondagas , who
have your habitation at the foot of the great hills , and are
overshadowed by their crags , shall be the third nation , because you are
greatly gifted in speech . You , the Senecas , whose dwelling is in the
dark forest , and whose home is all over the land , shall be the fourth
nation , because of your superior cunning in hunting . And you , the
Cayugas , the people who live in the open country and possess much
wisdom , shall be the fifth nation , because you understand better the art
of raising corn and beans , and making lodges . Unite , ye five nations , 
and have one common interest , and no foe shall disturb and subdue you . 
You , the people who are the feeble bushes , and you who are a fishing
people , may place yourselves under our protection , and we will defend
you . And you of the South and West may do the same , and we will protect
you . We earnestly desire the alliance and friendship of you all . 
Brothers , if we unite in this great bond , the Great Spirit will smile
upon us , and we shall be free , prosperous , and happy; but if we remain
as we are , we shall be subject to his frown . We shall be enslaved , 
ruined , perhaps annihilated . We may perish under the war-storm , and our
names be no longer remembered by good men , nor be repeated in the dance
and song . Brothers , those are the words of Hiawatha . I have spoken . I am
done . " [ : Canassatego , a renowned chief of the Confederacy , in
his remarkable piece of advice to the Colonial Commissioners of
Lancaster in July , 1744 , seems to imply that there was an error in this
plan of Hiawatha , as it did not admit all nations into their Confederacy
with equal rights . ]

The next day his plan of union was considered and adopted by the
council , after which Hiawatha again addressed the people with wise words
of counsel , and at the close of this speech bade them farewell; for he
conceived that his mission to the Iroquois was accomplished , and he
might announce his withdrawal to the skies . He then went down to the
shore , and assumed his seat in his mystical canoe . Sweet music was heard
in the air as he seated himself; and while the wondering multitude stood
gazing at their beloved chief , he was silently wafted from sight , and
they saw him no more . He passed to the Isle of the Blessed , inhabited by
Owayneo [ : A name for their Great Spirit in the dialect of the
Iroquois . ] and his manitos . 

 And they said ,  " Farewell forever ! " 
 Said ,  " Farewell , O Hiawatha ! " 
 And the forests , dark and lonely , 
 Moved through all their depths of darkness^
 Sighed ,  " Farewell , O Hiawatha ! " 
 And the waves upon the margin , 
 Rising , rippling on the pebbles , 
 Sobbed ,  " Farewell , O Hiawatha ! " 
 And the heron , the shuh-shu-gah , 
 From her haunts among the fen-lands , 
 Screamed ,  " Farewell , O Hiawatha ! " 
 Thus departed Hiawatha , 
 Hiawatha the Beloved , 
 In the glory of the sunset , 
 In the purple mists of evening , 
 To the regions of the home-wind , 
 Of the northwest wind , Keewaydin , 
 To the Islands of the Blessed , 
 To the kingdom of Ponemah , 
 To the land of the Hereafter . 

[ :  " The Song of Hiawatha , " by H . W . Longfellow . ]


