One of the most picturesque myths of ancient days is that told by
Jacques de Voragine , in his  " Legenda Aurea " : 

 " The seven sleepers were natives of Ephesus . The Emperor Decius , who
persecuted the Christians , having come to Ephesus , ordered the erection
of temples in the city , that all might come and sacrifice before him;
and he commanded that the Christians should be sought out and given
their choice , either to worship the idols , or to die . So great was the
consternation in the city , that the friend denounced his friend , the
father his son , and the son his father . 

 " Now there were in Ephesus seven Christians , Maximian , Malchus , Marcian , 
Dionysius , John , Serapion , and Constantine by name . These refused to
sacrifice to the idols , and remained in their houses praying and
fasting . They were accused before Decius , and they confessed themselves
to be Christians . However , the Emperor gave them a little time to
consider what line they would adopt . They took advantage of this
reprieve to dispense their goods among the poor , and they retired , all
seven , to Mount Celion , where they determined to conceal themselves . 

 " One of their number , Malchus , in the disguise of a physician , went to
the town to obtain victuals . Decius , who had been absent from Ephesus
for a little while , returned , and gave orders for the seven to be
sought . Malchus , having escaped from the town , fled , full of fear , to
his comrades , and told them of the Emperor ' s fury . They were much
alarmed; and Malchus handed them the loaves he had bought , bidding them
eat , that , fortified by the food , they might have courage in the time of
trial . They ate , and then , as they sat weeping and speaking to one
another , by the will of God they fell asleep . 

 " The pagans sought everywhere , but could not find them , and Decius was
greatly irritated at their escape . He had their parents brought before
him , and threatened them with death if they did not reveal the place of
concealment; but they could only answer that the seven young men had
distributed their goods to the poor , and that they were quite ignorant
as to their whereabouts . 

 " Decius , thinking it possible that they might be hiding in a cavern , 
blocked up the mouth with stones , that they might perish of hunger . " 

 * * * * *

 " Three hundred and sixty years passed , and in the thirtieth year of the
reign of Theodosius , there broke forth a heresy denying the resurrection
of the dead . 

 " Now , it happened that an Ephesian was building a stable on the side of
Mount Celion , and finding a pile of stones handy , he took them for his
edifice , and thus opened the mouth of the cave . Then the seven sleepers
awoke , and it was to them as if they had slept but a single night . They
began to ask Malchus what decision Decius had given concerning them . 

 " ' He is going to hunt us down , so as to force us to sacrifice to the
idols , ' was his reply .  ' God knows , ' replied Maximian ,  ' we shall never do
that . ' Then exhorting his companions , he urged Malchus to go back to the
town to buy some more bread , and at the same time to obtain fresh
information . Malchus took five coins and left the cavern . On seeing the
stones he was filled with astonishment; however , he went on toward the
city; but what was his bewilderment , on approaching the gate , to see
over it a cross ! He went to another gate , and there he beheld the same
sacred sign; and so he observed it over each gate of the city . He
believed that he was suffering from the effects of a dream . Then he
entered Ephesus , rubbing his eyes , and he walked to a baker ' s shop . He
heard people using our Lord ' s name , and he was the more perplexed . 
 ' Yesterday , no one dared pronounce the name of Jesus , and now it is on
every one ' s lips . Wonderful ! I can hardly believe myself to be in
Ephesus . ' He asked a passer-by the name of the city , and on being told
that it was Ephesus , he was thunderstruck . Now he entered a baker ' s
shop , and laid down his money . The baker , examining the coin , inquired
whether he had found a treasure , and began to whisper to some others in
the shop . The youth , thinking that he was discovered , and that they were
about to conduct him to the emperor , implored them to let him alone , 
offering to leave loaves and money if he might only be suffered to
escape . But the shop-men seizing him , said ,  ' Whoever you are , you have
found a treasure; show us where it is , that we may share it with you , 
and then we will hide you . ' Malchus was too frightened to answer . So
they put a rope round his neck , and drew him through the streets into
the marketplace . The news soon spread that the young man had discovered
a great treasure , and there was presently a vast crowd about him . He
stoutly protested his innocence . No one recognised him , and his eyes , 
ranging over the faces which surrounded him , could not see one which he
had known , or which was in the slightest degree familiar to him . 

 " St . Martin , the bishop , and Antipater , the governor , having heard of
the excitement , ordered the young man to be brought before them , along
with the bakers . 

 " The bishop and the governor asked him where he had found the treasure , 
and he replied that he had found none , but that the few coins were from
his own purse . He was next asked whence he came . He replied that he was
a native of Ephesus ,  ' if this be Ephesus . ' 

 " ' Send for your relations--your parents , if they live here , ' ordered the
governor . 

 " ' They live here certainly , ' replied the youth; and he mentioned their
names . No such names were known in the town . Then the governor
exclaimed ,  ' How dare you say that this money belonged to your parents
when it dates back three hundred and seventy-seven years , and is as old
as the beginning of the reign of Decius , and it is utterly unlike our
modern coinage ? Do you think to impose on the old men and sages of
Ephesus ? Believe me , I shall make you suffer the severities of the law
till you show where you made the discovery . ' 

 " ' I implore you , ' cried Malchus ,  ' in the name of God , answer me a few
questions , and then I will answer yours . Where is the Emperor Decius
gone to ? ' 

 " The bishop answered , ' My son , there is no emperor of that name; he who
was thus called died long ago . ' 

 " Malchus replied ,  ' All I hear perplexes me more and more . Follow me , and
I will show you my comrades , fled with me into a cave of Mount Celion , 
only yesterday , to escape the cruelty of Decius . I will lead you to
them . ' 

 " The bishop turned to the governor .  ' The hand of God is here , ' he said . 
Then they followed , and a great crowd after them . And Malchus entered
first into the cavern to his companions , and the bishop after him . And
there they saw the martyrs seated in the cave , with their faces fresh
and blooming as roses; so all fell down and glorified God . The bishop
and the governor sent notice to Theodosius , and he hurried to Ephesus . 
All the inhabitants met him and conducted him to the cavern . As soon as
the saints beheld the Emperor , their faces shone like the sun , and the
Emperor gave thanks unto God , and embraced them , and said ,  ' I see you , 
as though I saw the Saviour restoring Lazarus . ' Maximian replied , 
 ' Believe us ! for the faith ' s sake , God has resuscitated us before the
great resurrection day , in order that you may believe firmly in the
resurrection of the dead . For as the child is in its mother ' s womb
living and not suffering , so have we lived without suffering , fast
asleep . ' And having thus spoken , they bowed their heads , and their souls
returned to their Maker . The Emperor , rising , bent over them and
embraced them weeping . He gave them orders for golden reliquaries to be
made , but that night they appeared to him in a dream , and said that
hitherto they had slept in the earth , and that in the earth they desired
to sleep on till God should raise them again . " 


