He was long; he was strong; he was wiry . He was never sick , was
always good-natured , never a bully , always a friend of the weak , the
small and the unprotected . He must have been a funny-looking boy . 
His skin was sallow , and his hair was black , He wore a linsey-
woolsey shirt , buckskin breeches , a coon-skin cap , and heavy
 " clumps " of shoes . He grew so fast that his breeches never came down
to the tops of his shoes , and , instead of stockings , you could
always see  " twelve inches of shinbones , " sharp , blue , and narrow . He
laughed much , was always ready to give and take jokes and hard
knocks , had a squeaky , changing voice , a small head , big ears--and
was always what Thackeray called  " a gentle-man . " Such was Abraham
Lincoln at fifteen . 

He was never cruel , mean , or unkind . His first composition was on
cruelty to animals , written because he had tried to make the other
boys stop  " teasin ' tarrypins " --that is , catching turtles and putting
hot coals on their backs just to make them move along lively . He had
to work hard at home; for his father would not , and things needed to
be attended to if  " the place " was to be kept from dropping to
pieces . 

He became a great reader . He read every book and newspaper he could
get hold of , and if he came across anything in his reading that he
wished to remember he would copy it on a shingle , because writing
paper was scarce , and either learn it by heart or hide the shingle
away until he could get some paper to copy it on . His father thought
he read too much .  " It will spile him for work , " he said .  " He don ' t
do half enough about the place , as it is , now , and books and papers
ain ' t no good . " But Abraham , with all his reading , did more work
than his father any day; his stepmother , too , took his side and at
last got her husband to let the boy read and study at home .  " Abe was
a good son to me , " she said , many many years after ,  " and we took
particular care when he was reading not to disturb him . We would
just let him read on and on till he quit of his own accord . " 

The boy kept a sort of shingle scrap-book; he kept a paper scrap-
book , too . Into these he would put whatever he cared to keep--
poetry , history , funny sayings , fine passages . He had a scrap-book
for his arithmetic  " sums , " too , and one of these is still in
existence with this boyish rhyme in a boyish scrawl , underneath one
of his tables of weights and measures : 

 Abraham Lincoln
 his hand and pen
 he will be good but
 god knows when . 

God did know when; and that boy , all unconsciously , was working
toward the day when his hand and pen were to do more for humanity
than any other hand or pen of modern times . 

Lamps and candle were almost unknown in his home , and Abraham , flat
on his stomach , would often do his reading , writing , and ciphering
in the firelight , as it flashed and flickered on the big hearth of
his log-cabin home . An older cousin , John Hanks , who lived for a
while with the Lincolns , says that when  " Abe , " as he always called
the great President , would come home , as a boy , from his work , he
would go to the cupboard , take a piece of corn bread for his supper , 
sit down on a chair , stretch out his long legs until they were
higher than his head--and read , and read , and read .  " Abe and I , " 
said John Hanks ,  " worked barefoot; grubbed it , ploughed it , mowed
and cradled it; ploughed corn , gathered corn , and shucked corn , and
Abe read constantly whenever he could get a chance . " 

One day Abraham found that a man for whom he sometimes worked owned
a copy of Weems ' s  " Life of Washington . " This was a famous book in
its day . Abraham borrowed it at once . When he was not reading it , he
put it away on a shelf--a clapboard resting on wooden pins . There
was a big crack between the logs , behind the shelf , and one rainy
day the  " Life of Washington " fell into the crack and was soaked
almost into pulp . Old Mr . Crawford , from whom Abraham borrowed the
book , was a cross , cranky , and sour old fellow , and when the boy
told him of the accident he said Abraham must  " work the book out . " 

The boy agreed , and the old farmer kept him so strictly to his
promise that he made him  " pull fodder " for the cattle three days , as
payment for the book ! And that is the way that Abraham Lincoln
bought his first book . For he dried the copy of Weems ' s  " Life of
Washington " and put it in his  " library . " But what boy or girl of
today would like to buy books at such a price ? 

This was the boy-life of Abraham Lincoln . It was a life of poverty , 
privation , hard work , little play , and less money . The boy did not
love work . But he worked . His father was rough and often harsh and
hard to him , and what Abraham learned was by making the most of his
spare time . He was inquisitive , active , and hardy , and , in his
comfortless boyhood , he was learning lessons of self-denial , 
independence , pluck , shrewdness , kindness , and persistence . 

In the spring of 1830 , there was another  " moving time " for the
Lincolns . The corn and the cattle , the farm and its hogs were all
sold at public  " vandoo , " or auction , at low figures; and with all
their household goods on a big  " ironed " wagon drawn by four oxen , 
the three related families of Hanks , Hall and Lincoln , thirteen in
all , pushed on through the mud and across rivers , high from the
spring freshets , out of Indiana , into Illinois . 

Abraham held the  " gad " and guided the oxen . He carried with him , 
also , a little stock of pins , needles , thread , and buttons . These he
peddled along the way; and , at last , after fifteen days of slow
travel , the emigrants came to the spot picked out for a home . This
time it was on a small bluff on the north fork of the Sangamon
River , ten miles west of the town of Decatur . The usual log house
was built; the boys , with the oxen ,  " broke up , " or cleared , fifteen
acres of land , and split enough rails to fence it in . Abraham could
swing his broad-axe better than any man or boy in the West; at one
stroke he could bury the axe-blade to the haft , in a log , and he was
already famous as an expert rail-splitter . 

By this time his people were settled in their new home , Abraham
Lincoln was twenty-one . He was  " of age " --he was a man ! By the law of
the land he was freed from his father ' s control; he could shift for
himself , and he determined to do so . This did not mean that he
disliked his father . It simply meant that he had no intention of
following his father ' s example . Thomas Lincoln had demanded all the
work and all the wages his son could earn or do , and Abraham felt
that he could not have a fair chance to accomplish anything or get
ahead in the world if he continued living with this shiftless , 
never-satisfied , do-nothing man . 

So he struck out for himself . In the summer of 1830 , Abraham left
home and hired out on his own account , wherever he could get a job
in the new country into which he had come . In that region of big
farms and no fences , these latter were needed , and Abraham Lincoln ' s
stalwart arm and well-swung axe came well into play , cutting up logs
for fences . He was what was called in that western country a  " rail-
splitter . " Indeed , one of the first things he did when he struck out
for himself was to split four hundred rails for every yard of  " blue
jeans " necessary to make him a pair of trousers . From which it will
be seen that work was easier to get than clothes . 

He soon became as much of a favourite in Illinois as he had been in
Indiana . Other work came to him , and , in 1831 , he  " hired out " with a
man named Offutt to help sail a flat-boat down the Mississippi to
New Orleans . Mr . Offutt had heard that  " Abe Lincoln " was a good
river-hand , strong , steady , honest , reliable , accustomed to boating , 
and that he had already made one trip down the river . So he engaged
young Lincoln at what seemed to the young rail-splitter princely
wages--fifty cents a day , and a third share in the sixty dollars
which was to be divided among the three boatmen at the end of the
trip . 

They built the flat-boat at a saw mill near a place called Sangamon
town ,  " Abe " serving as cook of the camp while the boat was being
built . Then , loading the craft with barrel-pork , hogs , and corn , 
they started on their voyage south . At a place called New Salem the
flat-boat ran aground; but Lincoln ' s ingenuity got it off . He rigged
up a queer contrivance of his own invention and lifted the boat off
and over the obstruction , while all New Salem stood on the bank , 
first to criticise and then to applaud . 

Just what this invention was I cannot explain . But if you ever go
into the patent office at Washington , ask to see Abraham Lincoln ' s
patent for transporting river boats over snags and shoals . The
wooden model is there; for , so pleased was Lincoln with the success
that he thought seriously of becoming an inventor , and his first
design was the patent granted to him in 1849 , the idea for which
grew out of this successful floating of Offutt ' s flat-boat over the
river snags at New Salem nineteen years before . 

Once again he visited New Orleans , returning home , as before , by
steamboat . That voyage is remarkable , because it first opened young
Lincoln ' s eyes to the enormity of African slavery . Of course , he had
seen slaves before; but the sight of a slave sale in the old market
place of New Orleans seems to have aroused his anger and given him
an intense hatred of slave-holding . He , himself , declared , years
after , that it was that visit to New Orleans , that had set him so
strongly against slavery . 

There is a story told by one of his companions that Lincoln looked
for a while upon the dreadful scenes of the slave market and then , 
turning away , said excitedly ,  " Come away , boys ! If I ever get a
chance , some day , to hit that thing " --and he flung his long arm
toward the dreadful auction block-- " I ' ll hit it hard . " 

Soon after he returned from his flat-boat trip to New Orleans he had
an opportunity to show that he could not and would not stand what is
termed  " foul play . " The same Mr . Offutt who had hired Lincoln to be
one of his flat-boat  " boys , " gave him another opportunity for work . 
Offutt was what is called in the West a  " hustler " ; he had lots of
 " great ideas " and plans for making money; and , among his numerous
enterprises , was one to open a country store and mill at New Salem--
the very same village on the Sangamon where , by his  " patent
invention , " Lincoln had lifted the flat-boat off the snags . 

Mr . Offutt had taken a great fancy to Lincoln , and offered him a
place as clerk in the New Salem store . The young fellow jumped at
the chance . It seemed to him quite an improvement on being a farm-
hand , a flat-boatman , or a rail-splitter . It was , indeed , a step
upward; for it gave him better opportunities for self-instruction
and more chances for getting ahead . 

Offutt ' s store was a favourite  " loafing place " for the New Salem
boys and young men . Among these , were some of the roughest fellows
in the settlement . They were known as the  " Clary Grove Boys , " and
they were always ready for a fight , in which they would , sometimes , 
prove themselves to be bullies and tormentors . When , therefore , 
Offutt began to brag about his new clerk the Clary Grove Boys made
fun at him; whereupon the storekeeper cried :  " What ' s that ? You can
throw him ? Well , I reckon not; Abe Lincoln can out-run , out-walk , 
out-rassle , knock out , and throw down any man in Sangamon County . " 
This was too much for the Clary Grove Boys . They took up Offutt ' s
challenge , and , against  " Abe , " set up , as their champion and  " best
man , " one Jack Armstrong . 

All this was done without Lincoln ' s knowledge . He had no desire to
get into a row with anyone--least of all with the bullies who made
up the Clary Grove Boys . 

 " I won ' t do it , " he said , when Offutt told him of the proposed
wrestling match .  " I never tussle and scuffle , and I will not . I
don ' t like this wooling and pulling . " 

 " Don ' t let them call you a coward , Abe , " said Offutt . 

Of course , you know what the end would be to such an affair . Nobody
likes to be called a coward--especially when he knows he is not one . 
So , at last , Lincoln consented to  " rassle " with Jack Armstrong . They
met , with all the boys as spectators . They wrestled , and tugged , and
clenched , but without result . Both young fellows were equally
matched in strength .  " It ' s no use , Jack , " Lincoln at last declared . 
 " Let ' s quit . You can ' t throw me , and I can ' t throw you . That ' s
enough . " 

With that , all Jack ' s backers began to cry  " coward ! " and urged on
the champion to another tussle . Jack Armstrong was now determined to
win , by fair means or foul . He tried the latter , and , contrary to
all rules of wrestling began to kick and trip , while his supporters
stood ready to help , if need be , by breaking in with a regular free
fight . This  " foul play " roused the lion in Lincoln . He hated
unfairness , and at once resented it . He suddenly put forth his
Samson-like strength , grabbed the champion of the Clary Grove Boys
by the throat , and , lifting him from the ground , held him at arm ' s
length and shook him as a dog shakes a rat . Then he flung him to the
ground , and , facing the amazed and yelling crowd , he cried :  " You
cowards ! You know I don ' t want to fight; but if you try any such
games , I ' ll tackle the whole lot of you . I ' ve won the fight . " 

He had . From that day , no man in all that region dared to  " tackle " 
young Lincoln , or to taunt him with cowardice . And Jack Armstrong
was his devoted friend and admirer . 

I have told you more , perhaps , of the famous fight than I ought--not
because it was a fight , but because it gives you a glimpse of
Abraham Lincoln ' s character . He disliked rows; he was too kind-
hearted and good-natured to wish to quarrel with any one; but he
hated unfairness , and was enraged at anything like persecution or
bullying . If you will look up Shakespeare ' s play of  " Hamlet " you
will see that Lincoln was ready to act upon the advice that old
Polonius gave to his son Laertes : 

  " Beware
 Of entrance to a quarrel; but , being in , 
 Bear it that the opposer may beware of thee . " 

He became quite a man in that little community . As a clerk he was
obliging and strictly honest . He was the judge and the settler of
all disputes , and none thought of combating his decisions . He was
the village peacemaker . He hated profanity , drunkenness , and
unkindness to women . He was feared and respected by all , and even
the Clary Grove Boys declared , at last , that he was  " the cleverest
feller that ever broke into the settlement . " 

All the time , too , he was trying to improve himself . He liked to sit
around and talk and tell stories , just the same as ever; but he saw
this was not the way to get on in the world . He worked , whenever he
had the chance , outside of his store duties; and once , when trade
was dull and hands were short in the clearing , he  " turned to " and
split enough logs into rails to make a pen for a thousand hogs . 

When he was not at work he devoted himself to his books . He could
 " read , write , and cipher " --this was more education than most men
about him possessed; but he hoped , some day , to go before the
public; to do this , he knew he must speak and write correctly . He
talked to the village schoolmaster , who advised him to study English
grammar . 

 " Well , if I had a grammar , " said Lincoln ,  " I ' d begin now . Have you
got one ? " 

The schoolmaster had no grammar; but he told  " Abe " of a man , six
miles off , who owned one . Thereupon , Lincoln started upon the run to
borrow that grammar . He brought it back so quickly that the
schoolmaster was astonished . Then he set to work to learn the  " rules
and exceptions . " He studied that grammar , stretched full length on
the store-counter , or under a tree outside the store , or at night
before a blazing fire of shavings in the cooper ' s shop . And soon , he
had mastered it . He borrowed every book in New Salem; he made the
schoolmaster give him lessons in the store; he button-holed every
stranger that came into the place  " who looked as though he knew
anything " ; until , at last , every one in New Salem was ready to echo
Offutt ' s boast that  " Abe Lincoln " knew more than any man  " in these
United States . " One day , in the bottom of an old barrel of trash , he
made a splendid  " find . " It was two old law books . He read and re-
read them , got all the sense and argument out of their dry pages , 
blossomed into a debater , began to dream of being a lawyer , and
became so skilled in seeing through and settling knotty questions
that , once again , New Salem wondered at this clerk of Offutt ' s , who
was as long of head as of arms and legs , and declared that  " Abe
Lincoln could out-argue any ten men in the settlement . " 

In all the history of America there has been no man who started
lower and climbed higher than Abraham Lincoln , the backwoods boy . He
never  " slipped back . " He always kept going ahead . He broadened his
mind , enlarged his outlook , and led his companions rather than let
them lead him . He was jolly company , good-natured , kind-hearted , 
fond of jokes and stories and a good time generally; but he was the
champion of the weak , the friend of the friendless , as true a knight
and as full of chivalry as any one of the heroes in armour of whom
you read in  " Ivanhoe " or  " The Talisman . " He never cheated , never
lied , never took an unfair advantage of anyone; but he was
ambitious , strong-willed , a bold fighter and a tough adversary--a
fellow who would never  " say die " ; and who , therefore , succeeded . 


