About the middle of the twelfth century , a rumour circulated through
Europe that there reigned in Asia a powerful Christian Emperor , 
Presbyter Johannes . In a bloody fight he had broken the power of the
Mussulmans , and was ready to come to the assistance of the Crusaders . 
Great was the exultation in Europe , for of late the news from the East
had been gloomy and depressing , the power of the infidel had increased , 
overwhelming masses of men had been brought into the field against the
chivalry of Christendom , and it was felt that the cross must yield
before the odious crescent . 

The news of the success of the Priest-King opened a door of hope to the
desponding Christian world . Pope Alexander III . determined at once to
effect a union with this mysterious personage , and on the 27th of
September , 1177 , wrote him a letter , which he intrusted to his
physician , Philip , to deliver in person . 

Philip started on his embassy , but never returned . The conquests of
Tschengis-Khan again attracted the eyes of Christian Europe to the East . 
The Mongol hordes were rushing in upon the West with devastating
ferocity; Russia , Poland , Hungary , and the Eastern provinces of Germany
had succumbed , or suffered grievously; and the fears of other nations
were roused lest they too should taste the misery of a Mongolian
invasion . It was Gog and Magog come to slaughter , and the times of
Antichrist were dawning . But the battle of Liegnitz stayed them in their
onward career , and Europe was saved . 

Pope Innocent IV . determined to convert these wild hordes of barbarians , 
and subject them to the cross of Christ; he therefore sent among them a
number of Dominican and Franciscan missioners , and embassies of peace
passed between the Pope , the King of France , and the Mogul Khan , 

The result of these communications with the East was , that the
travellers learned how false were the prevalent notions of a mighty
Christian empire existing in Central Asia . Vulgar superstition or
conviction is not , however , to be upset by evidence , and the locality of
the monarchy was merely transferred by the people to Africa , and they
fixed upon Abyssinia , with a show of truth , as the seat of the famous
Priest-King . However , still some doubted . John de Piano Carpini and
Marco Polo , though they acknowledged the existence of a Christian
monarch in Abyssinia , yet stoutly maintained as well that Prester John
of popular belief reigned in splendour somewhere in the dim Orient . 

But before proceeding with the history of this strange fable , it will be
well to extract the different accounts given of the Priest-King and his
realm by early writers; and we shall then be better able to judge of the
influence the myth obtained in Europe . 

Otto of Freisingen is the first author to mention the monarchy of
Prester John , with whom we are acquainted . Otto wrote a chronicle up to
the date 1156 , and he relates that in 1145 the Catholic Bishop of Cabala
visited Europe to lay certain complaints before the Pope . He mentioned
the fall of Edessa , and also  " he stated that a few years ago a certain
King and Priest called John , who lives on the farther side of Persia and
Armenia , in the remote East , and who , with all his people , were
Christians , though belonging to the Nestorian Church , had overcome the
royal brothers Samiardi , kings of the Medes and Persians , and had
captured Ecbatana , their capital and residence . The said kings had met
with their Persian , Median , and Assyrian troops , and had fought for
three consecutive days , each side having determined to die rather than
take to flight . Prester John , for so they are wont to call him , at
length routed the Persians , and after a bloody battle , remained
victorious . After which victory the said John was hastening to the
assistance of the Church at Jerusalem , but his host , on reaching the
Tigris , was hindered from passing , through a deficiency in boats , and he
directed his march North , since he had heard that the river was there
covered with ice . In that place he had waited many years , expecting
severe cold; but the winters having proved unpropitious , and the
severity of the climate having carried off many soldiers , he had been
forced to retreat to his own land . This king belongs to the family of
the Magi , mentioned in the Gospel , and he rules over the very people
formerly governed by the Magi; moreover , his fame and his wealth are so
great , that he uses an emerald sceptre only . 

 " Excited by the example of his ancestors , who came to worship Christ in
his cradle , he had proposed to go to Jerusalem , but had been impeded by
the above-mentioned causes . " 

At the same time the story crops up in other quarters; so that we cannot
look upon Otto as the inventor of the myth . The celebrated Maimonides
alludes to it in a passage quoted by Joshua Lorki , a Jewish physician to
Benedict XIII . Maimonides lived from 1135 to 1204 . The passage is as
follows :  " It is evident both from the letters of Rambam  ( Maimonides ) , 
whose memory be blessed , and from the narration of merchants who have
visited the ends of the earth , that at this time the root of our faith
is to be found in the lands of Babel and Teman , where long ago Jerusalem
was an exile; not reckoning those who live in the land of Paras and
Madai , of the exiles of Schomrom , the number of which people is as the
sand : of these some are still under the yoke of Paras , who is called the
Great-Chief Sultan by the Arabs; others live in a place under the yoke
of a strange people  . . . governed by a Christian chief , Preste-Cuan by
name . With him they have made a compact , and he with them; and this is a
matter concerning which there can be no manner of doubt . " 

Benjamin of Tudela , another Jew , travelled in the East between the years
1159 and 1173 , the last being the date of his death . He wrote an account
of his travels , and gives in it some information with regard to a
mythical Jew king , who reigned in the utmost splendour over a realm
inhabited by Jews alone , situate somewhere in the midst of a desert of
vast extent . About this period there appeared a document which produced
intense excitement throughout Europe--a letter , yes ! a letter from the
mysterious personage himself to Manuel Comnenus , Errmeror of
Constantinople  ( 1143-1180 ) . The exact date of this extraordinary epistle
cannot be fixed with any certainty , but it certainly appeared before
1241 , the date of the conclusion of the chronicle of Albericus Trium
Fontium . This Albericus relates that in the year 1165  " Presbyter
Johannes , the Indian king , sent his wonderful letter to various
Christian princes , and especially to Manuel of Constantinople , and
Frederic the Roman Emperor . " Similar letters were sent to Alexander
III , to Louis VII of France , and to the King of Portugal , which are
alluded to in chronicles and romances , and which were indeed turned into
rhyme , and sung all over Europe by minstrels and trouveres . The letter
is as follows : 

 " John , Priest by the Almighty power of God and the Might of our Lord
Jesus Christ , King of Kings , and Lord of Lords , to his friend Emanuel , 
Prince of Constantinople , greeting , wishing him health , prosperity , and
the continuance of Divine favour . 

 " Our Majesty has been informed that you hold our Excellency in love , and
that the report of our greatness has reached you . Moreover , we have
heard through our treasurer that you have been pleased to send to us
some objects of art and interest , that our Exaltedness might be
gratified thereby . 

 " Being human , I receive it in good part , and we have ordered our
treasurer to send you some of our articles in return . 

 " Now we desire to be made certain that you hold the right faith , and in
all things cleave to Jesus Christ , our Lord , for we have heard that your
court regard you as a god , though we know that you are mortal , and
subject to human infirmities . . . . Should you desire to learn the greatness
and excellency of our Exaltedness and of the land subject to our
sceptre , then hear and believe : I , Presbyter Johannes , the Lord of
Lords , surpass all under heaven in virtue , in riches , and in power;
seventy-two kings pay us tribute . . . . In the three Indies our Magnificence
rules , and our land extends beyond India , where rests the body of the
holy Apostle Thomas; it reaches toward the sunrise over the wastes , and
it trends toward deserted Babylon near the tower of Babel . Seventy-two
provinces , of which only a few are Christian , serve us . Each has its own
king , but all are tributary to us . 

 " Our land is the home of elephants , dromedaries , camels , crocodiles , 
meta-collinarum , cametennus , ten-sevetes , wild asses , white and red
lions , white bears , white merules , crickets , griffins , tigers , lamias , 
hyenas , wild horses , wild oxen and wild men , men with horns , one-eyed , 
men with eyes before and behind , centaurs , fauns , satyrs , pygmies , 
forty-ell-high giants , Cyclopses , and similar women; it is the home , 
too , of the phoenix , and of nearly all living animals . We have some
people subject to us who feed on the flesh of men and of prematurely
born animals , and who never fear death . When any of these people die , 
their friends and relations eat them ravenously , for they regard it as a
main duty to munch human flesh . Their names are Gog and Magog , Anie , 
Agit , Azenach , Fommeperi , Befari , Conei-Samante , Agrimandri , Vintefolei , 
Casbei , Alanei . These and similar nations were shut in behind lofty
mountains by Alexander the Great , toward the North . We lead them at our
pleasure against our foes , and neither man nor beast is left undevoured , 
if our Majesty gives the requisite permission . And when all our foes are
eaten , then we return with our hosts home again . These accursed fifteen
nations will burst forth from the four quarters of the earth at the end
of the world , in the times of Antichrist , and overrun all the abodes of
the Saints as well as the great city Rome , which , by the way , we are
prepared to give to our son who will be born , along with all Italy , 
Germany , the two Gauls , Britain and Scotland . We shall also give him
Spain and all the land as far as the icy sea . The nations to which I
have alluded , according to the words of the prophet , shall not stand in
the judgment , on account of their offensive practices , but will be
consumed to ashes by a fire which will fall on them from heaven . 

 " Our land streams with honey , and is overflowing with milk . In one
region grows no poisonous herb , nor does a querulous frog ever quack in
it; no scorpion exists , nor does the serpent glide amongst the grass , 
nor can any poisonous animals exist in it , or injure any one . 

 " Among the heathen , flows through a certain province the River Indus;
encircling Paradise , it spreads its arms in manifold windings through
the entire province . Here are found the emeralds , sapphires , carbuncles , 
topazes , chrysolites , onyxes , beryls , sardius , and other costly stones . 
Here grows the plant Assidos , which , when worn by any one , protects him
from the evil spirit , forcing it to state its business and name;
consequently the foul spirits keep out of the way there . In a certain
land subject to us , all kinds of pepper is gathered , and is exchanged
for corn and bread , leather and cloth . . . . At the foot of Mount Olympus
bubbles up a spring which changes its flavour hour by hour , night and
day , and the spring is scarcely three days ' journey from Paradise , out
of which Adam was driven . If any one has tasted thrice of the fountain , 
from that day he will feel no fatigue , but will , as long as he lives , be
as a man of thirty years . Here are found the small stones called
Nudiosi , which , if borne about the body , prevent the sight from waxing
feeble , and restore it where it is lost . The more the stone is looked
at , the keener becomes the sight . In our territory is a certain
waterless sea , consisting of tumbling billows of sand never at rest . 
None have crossed this sea; it lacks water altogether , yet fish are cast
up upon the beach of various kinds , very tasty , and the like are nowhere
else to be seen . Three days ' journey from this sea are mountains from
which rolls down a stony , waterless river , which opens into the sandy
sea . As soon as the stream reaches the sea , its stones vanish in it , and
are never seen again . As long as the river is in motion , it cannot be
crossed; only four days a week is it possible to traverse it . Between
the sandy sea and the said mountains , in a certain plain is a fountain
of singular virtue , which purges Christians and would-be Christians from
all transgressions . The water stands four inches high in a hollow stone
shaped like a musselsheil . Two saintly old men watch by it , and ask the
comers whether they are Christians , or are about to become Christians , 
then whether they desire healing with all their hearts . If they have
answered well , they are bidden to lay aside their clothes , and to step
into the mussel . If what they said be true , then the water begins to
rise and gush over their heads; thrice does the water thus lift itself , 
and every one who has entered the mussel leaves it cured of every
complaint . 

 " Near the wilderness trickles between barren mountains a subterranean
rill , which can only by chance be reached , for only occasionally the
earth gapes , and he who would descend must do it with precipitation , ere
the earth closes again . All that is gathered under the ground there is
gem and precious stone . The brook pours into another river , and the
inhabitants of the neighbourhood obtain thence abundance of precious
stones . Yet they never venture to sell them without having first offered
them to us for our private use : should we decline them , they are at
liberty to dispose of them to strangers . Boys there are trained to
remain three or four days under water , diving after the stones . 

 " Beyond the stone river are the ten tribes of the Jews , which , though
subject to their own kings , are , for all that , our slaves and tributary
to our Majesty . In one of our lands , hight Zone , are worms called in our
tongue Salamanders . These worms can only live in fire , and they build
cocoons like silk-worms , which are unwound by the ladies of our palace , 
and spun into cloth and dresses , which are worn by our Exaltedness . 
These dresses , in order to be cleaned and washed , are cast into
flames . . . . When we go to war , we have fourteen golden and bejewelled
crosses borne before us instead of banners; each of these crosses is
followed by 10 , 000 horsemen , and 100 , 000 foot soldiers fully armed , 
without reckoning those in charge of the luggage and provision . 

 " When we ride abroad plainly , we have a wooden , unadorned cross , without
gold or gem about it , borne before us , in order that we may meditate on
the sufferings of Our Lord Jesus Christ; also a golden bowl filled with
earth , to remind us of that whence we sprung , and that to which we must
return; but besides these there is borne a silver bowl full of gold , as
a token to all that we are the Lord of Lords . 

 " All riches , such as are upon the world , our Magnificence possesses in
superabundance . With us no one lies , for he who speaks a lie is
thenceforth regarded as dead; he is no more thought of , or honoured by
us . No vice is tolerated by us . Every year we undertake a pilgrimage , 
with retinue of war , to the body of the holy prophet Daniel , which is
near the desolated site of Babylon . In our realm fishes are caught , the
blood of which dyes purple . The Amazons and the Brahmins are subject to
us . The palace in which our Super-eminency resides , is built after the
pattern of the castle built by the Apostle Thomas for the Indian king
Gundoforus . Ceilings , joists , and architrave are of Sethym wood , the
roof of ebony , which can never catch fire . Over the gable of the palace
are , at the extremities , two golden apples , in each of which are two
carbuncles , so that the gold may shine by day , and the carbuncles by
night . The greater gates of the palace are of sardius , with the horn of
the horned snake inwrought , so that no one can bring poison within . 

 " The other portals are of ebony . The windows are of crystal; the tables
are partly of gold , partly of amethyst , and the columns supporting the
tables are partly of ivory , partly of amethyst . The court in which we
watch the jousting is floored with onyx in order to increase the courage
of the combatants . In the palace , at night , nothing is burned for light
but wicks supplied with balsam . . . . Before our palace stands a mirror , the
ascent to which consists of five and twenty steps of porphyry and
serpentine . " After a description of the gems adorning this mirror , which
is guarded night and day by three thousand armed men , he explains its
use :  " We look therein and behold all that is taking place in every
province and region subject to our sceptre . 

 " Seven kings wait upon us monthly , in turn , with sixty-two dukes , two
hundred and fifty-six counts and marquises : and twelve archbishops sit
at table with us on our right , and twenty bishops on the left , besides
the patriarch of St . Thomas , the Sarmatian Protopope , and the Archpope
of Susa . . . . Our lord high steward is a primate and king , our cup-bearer
is an archbishop and king , our chamberlain a bishop and king , our
marshal king and abbot . " 


