BLACK LOOKS AND BRIGHT SWORDS

IT was in the dusk of an avenue that Evan Dhu had warned Waverley to
beware , and ere he had reached the end of the long double line of trees , 
a pistol cracked in the covert , and a bullet whistled close past his
ear . 

 " There he is , " cried Edward ' s attendant , a stout Merseman of the
Baron ' s troop;  " it ' s that devil ' s brat , Callum Beg . " 

And Edward , looking through the trees , could make out a figure running
hastily in the direction of the camp of the Mac-Ivors . 

Instantly Waverley turned his horse , and rode straight up to Fergus . 

 " Colonel Mac-Ivor , " he said , without any attempt at salutation ,  " I have
to inform you that one of your followers has just attempted to murder me
by firing upon me from a lurking-place . " 

 " Indeed ! " said the Chief , haughtily;  " well , as that , save in the matter
of the lurking-place , is a pleasure I presently propose for myself , I
should be glad to know which of my clansmen has dared to anticipate me . " 

 " I am at your service when you will , sir , " said Edward , with equal
pride ,  " but in the meantime the culprit was your page , Callum Beg . " 

 " Stand forth , Callum Beg , " cried Vich Ian Vohr;  " did you fire at Mr . 
Waverley ? " 

 " No , " said the unblushing Callum . 

 " You did , " broke in Edward ' s attendant ,  " I saw you as plain as ever I
saw Coudingham kirk ! " 

 " You lie ! " returned Callum , not at all put out by the accusation . But
his Chief demanded Callum ' s pistol . The hammer was down . The pan and
muzzle were black with smoke , the barrel yet warm . It had that moment
been fired . 

 " Take that ! " cried the Chief , striking the boy full on the head with the
metal butt;  " take that , for daring to act without orders and then lying
to disguise it . " 

Callum made not the slightest attempt to escape the blow , and fell as if
he had been slain on the spot . 

 " And now , Mr . Waverley , " said the Chief ,  " be good enough to turn your
horse twenty yards with me out upon the common . I have a word to say to
you . " 

Edward did so , and as soon as they were alone , Fergus fiercely charged
him with having thrown aside his sister Flora in order to pay his court
to Rose Bradwardine , whom , as he knew , Fergus had chosen for his own
bride . 

 " It was the Prince--the Prince himself who told me ! " added Fergus , 
noticing the astonishment on Edward ' s face . 

 " Did the Prince tell you that I was engaged to Miss Rose Bradwardine ? " 
cried Edward . 

 " He did--this very morning , " shouted Fergus;  " he gave it as a reason for
a second time refusing my request . So draw and defend yourself , or
resign once and forever all claims to the lady . " 

 " In such a matter I will not be dictated to by you or any man living ! " 
retorted Waverley , growing angry in his turn . 

In a moment swords were out and a fierce combat was beginning , when a
number of Bradwardine ' s cavalry , who being Lowlanders were always at
feud with the Highlandmen , rode hastily up , calling on their companions
to follow . They had heard that there was a chance of a fight between
their corps and the Highlanders . Nothing would have pleased them
better . The Baron himself threatened that unless the Mac-Ivors returned
to their ranks , he would charge them , while they on their side pointed
their guns at him and his Lowland cavalry . 

A cry that the Prince was approaching alone prevented bloodshed . The
Highlanders returned to their places . The cavalry dressed its ranks . It
was indeed the Chevalier who arrived . His first act was to get one of
his French officers , the Count of Beaujeu , to set the regiment of
Mac-Ivors and the Lowland cavalry again upon the road . He knew that the
Count ' s broken English would put them all in better humour , while he
himself remained to make the peace between Fergus and Waverley . 

Outwardly the quarrel was soon made up . Edward explained that he had no
claims whatever to be considered as engaged to Rose Bradwardine or any
one else , while Fergus sulkily agreed that it was possible he had made a
mistake . The Prince made them shake hands , which they did with the air
of two dogs whom only the presence of the master kept from flying at
each other ' s throats . Then after calming the Clan Mac-Ivor and riding
awhile with the Baron ' s Lowland cavalry , the Prince returned to the
Count of Beaujeu , saying with a sigh , as he reined his charger beside
him ,  " Ah , my friend , believe me this business of prince-errant is no bed
of roses ! " 

 * * * * *

It was not long before the poor Prince had a further proof of this fact . 

On the 5th of December , after a council at Derby , the Highland chiefs , 
disappointed that the country did not rally about them , and that the
government forces were steadily increasing on all sides , compelled the
Prince to fall back toward Scotland . Fergus Mac-Ivor fiercely led the
opposition to any retreat . He would win the throne for his Prince , or if
he could not , then he and every son of Ivor would lay down their lives . 
That was his clear and simple plan of campaign . But he was easily
overborne by numbers , and when he found himself defeated in council , he
shed actual tears of grief and mortification . From that moment Vich Ian
Vohr was an altered man . 

Since the day of the quarrel Edward had seen nothing of him . It was , 
therefore , with great surprise that he saw Fergus one evening enter his
lodgings and invite him to take a walk with him . The Chieftain smiled
sadly as he saw his old friend take down his sword and buckle it on . 
There was a great change in the appearance of Vich Ian Vohr . His cheek
was hollow . His eye burned as if with fever . 

As soon as the two young men had reached a beautiful and solitary glen , 
Fergus began to tell Edward that he had found out how wrongheaded and
rash he had been in the matter of their quarrel .  " Flora writes me , " 
continued Fergus ,  " that she never had , and never could have , the least
intention of giving you any encouragement . I acted hastily--like a
madman ! " 

Waverley hastily entreated him to let all be forgotten , and the two
comrades-in-arms shook hands , this time heartily and sincerely . 

Notwithstanding , the gloom on the Chief ' s brow was scarcely lightened . 
He even besought Waverley to betake himself at once out of the kingdom
by an eastern port , to marry Rose Bradwardine , and to take Flora with
him as a companion to Rose , and also for her own protection . 

Edward was astonished at this complete change in Fergus . 

 " What ! " he cried ,  " abandon the expedition on which we have all
embarked ? " 

 " Embarked , " answered the Chief , bitterly;  " why , man , the expedition is
going to pieces ! It is time for all those who can , to get ashore in the
longboat ! " 

 " And what , " said Edward ,  " are the other Highland chiefs going to do ? " 

 " Oh , the chiefs , " said Fergus , contemptuously ,  " they think that all the
heading and hanging will , as before , fall to the lot of the Lowlands , 
and that they will be left alone in their poor and barren Highlands , to
 ' listen to the wind on the hill till the waters abate . ' But they will be
disappointed . The government will make sure work this time , and leave
not a clan in all the Highlands able to do them hurt . As for me , it will
not matter . I shall either be dead or taken by this time to-morrow . I
have seen the _Bodach Glas_--the Grey Spectre . " 

Edward looked the surprise he did not speak . 

 " Why ! " continued Fergus , in a low voice ,  " were you so long about
Glennaquoich and yet never heard of the Bodach Glas ? The story is well
known to every son of Ivor . I will tell it you in a word . My forefather , 
Ian nan Chaistel , wasted part of England along with a Lowland chief
named Halbert Hall . After passing the Cheviots on their way back , they
quarrelled about the dividing of the spoil , and from words came speedily
to blows . In the fight , the Lowlanders were cut off to the last man , and
their leader fell to my ancestor ' s sword . But ever since that day the
dead man ' s spirit has crossed the Chief of Clan Ivor on the eve of any
great disaster . My father saw him twice , once before he was taken
prisoner at Sheriff-Muir , and once again on the morning of the day on
which he died . " 

Edward cried out against such superstition . 

 " How can you , " he said ,  " you who have seen the world , believe such
child ' s nonsense as that ? " 

 " Listen , " said the Chief ,  " here are the facts , and you can judge for
yourself . Last night I could not sleep for thinking on the downfall of
all my hopes for the cause , for the Prince , for the clan--so , after
lying long awake , I stepped out into the frosty air . I had crossed a
small foot-bridge , and was walking backward and forward , when I saw , 
clear before me in the moonlight , a tall man wrapped in a grey plaid , 
such as the shepherds wear . The figure kept regularly about four yards
from me . " 

 " That is an easy riddle , " exclaimed Edward;  " why , my dear Fergus , what
you saw was no more than a Cumberland peasant in his ordinary dress ! " 

 " So I thought at first , " answered Fergus ,  " and I was astonished at the
man ' s audacity in daring to dog me . I called to him , but got no answer . 
I felt my heart beating quickly , and to find out what I was afraid of , I
turned and faced first north , and then south , east , and west . Each way I
turned , I saw the grey figure before my eyes at precisely the same
distance ! Then I knew I had seen the Bodach Glas . My hair stood up , and
so strong an impression of awe came upon me that I resolved to return to
my quarters . As I went , the spirit glided steadily before me , till we
came to the narrow bridge , where it turned and stood waiting for me . I
could not wade the stream . I could not bring myself to turn back . So , 
making the sign of the cross , I drew my sword and cried aloud ,  ' In the
name of God , Evil Spirit , give place ! ' 

 " ' _Vich Ian Vohr_ , ' it said in a dreadful voice ,  ' _beware of
to-morrow ! _ ' 

 " It was then within half a yard of my sword ' s point , but as the words
were uttered it was gone . There was nothing either on the bridge or on
the way home . All is over . I am doomed . I have seen the Bodach Glas , 
the curse of my house . " 


Edward could think of nothing to say in reply . His friend ' s belief in
the reality of the vision was too strong . He could only ask to be
allowed to march once more with the sons of Ivor , who occupied the post
of danger in the rear . Edward easily obtained the Baron ' s leave to do
so , and when the Clan Mac-Ivor entered the village , he joined them , once
more arm in arm with their Chieftain . At the sight , all the Mac-Ivors ' 
ill feeling was blown away in a moment . Evan Dhu received him with a
grin of pleasure . And the imp Callum , with a great patch on his head , 
appeared particularly delighted to see him . 

But Waverley ' s stay with the Clan Ivor was not to be long . The enemy was
continually harassing their flanks , and the rear-guard had to keep
lining hedges and dikes in order to beat them off . Night was already
falling on the day which Fergus had foretold would be his last , when in
a chance skirmish of outposts the Chief with a few followers found
himself surrounded by a strong attacking force of dragoons . A swift eddy
of the battle threw Edward out to one side . The cloud of night lifted , 
and he saw Evan Dhu and a few others , with the Chieftain in their midst , 
desperately defending themselves against a large number of dragoons who
were hewing at them with their swords . It was quite impossible for
Waverley to break through to their assistance . Night shut down
immediately , and he found it was equally impossible for him to rejoin
the retreating Highlanders , whose warpipes he could still hear in the
distance . 


INTERLUDE OF BREVITY

 The _Bodach Glas_ held the children . The brilliant
 sunshine of the High Garden in which they had
 listened to the tale became instantly palest
 moonlight , and between them and the strawberry bed
 they saw the filmy plaid of the Grey Spectre of the
 House of Ivor . It had been helpful and even
 laudable to play-act the chief scenes when the
 story was beginning , but now they had no time . It
 would have been an insult to the interest of the
 narrative . 

 Doubtless , if they had had the book , they would
 have _skipped_ , to know  " how it all ended . " But it
 was time for the evening walk . So , instead of
 stringing themselves out along the way as was their
 custom , seeing if the raspberry bushes had grown
 any taller since the morning , the four collected in
 a close swarm about the tale-teller , like bees
 about an emigrant queen . 

  " You must tell us the rest--you _must ! _ " they said , 
 linking arms about my waist to prevent any attempt
 at an evasion of such just demands . 

 So , being secretly no little pleased with their
 eagerness , I launched out upon the conclusion of
 the whole matter--which showed , among other things , 
 how Waverley-Honour was more honoured than ever and
 the Blessed Bear of Bradwardine threefold blessed . 


