I . HAPPY DOMINIE SAMPSON

IT was seventeen long years after the murder of Frank Kennedy and the
disappearance of little Harry Bertram when Guy Mannering , now a soldier
famous for his wars in the East , penetrated a second time into Galloway . 
His object was to visit the family of Ellangowan , and secretly , also , to
find out for himself in what way his random prophesies had worked out . 

But he arrived at an unfortunate time . He found that , chiefly by the
plotting and deceit of a rascally lawyer , one Gilbert Glossin , the
Bertrams were on the point of being sold out of Ellangowan . All their
money had been lost , and the sale of the estate was being forced on by
the rascally lawyer Glossin for his own ends . 

The old man Godfrey Bertram also was very near his end . And indeed on
the very day of the sale , and while Mannering was paying his respects to
his former host , the sight of Glossin so enraged the feeble old man that
he was taken with a violent passion , falling back in his chair and dying
in a few minutes . 

Mannering , whose heart was greatly touched , was most anxious to do all
that he could to assist Lucy Bertram , the old man ' s daughter , but he was
compelled by an urgent summons to return into England . It had been his
intention to save the estate of Ellangowan from the clutches of the
scoundrel Glossin by buying it himself , but the drunkenness of a postboy
whom he had sent with a letter to Mr . Mac-Morlan , the lawyer in charge
of the sale , defeated his intentions , so that Ellangowan became the
property of the traitor . So young Lucy Bertram and Dominie Sampson  ( who
refused to be separated from her ) became for the moment inmates of Mr . 
Mac-Morlan ' s house . The Dominie found a pupil or two in the
neighbourhood that he might not be chargeable to his dear Lucy or her
friend Mr . Mac-Morlan . And so , in the twenty-first year after the birth
of an heir , and after Mannering ' s prophecy concerning him , there seemed
an end to the ancient house of the Bertrams of Ellangowan . 

During these years , Colonel Mannering also had a tale to tell . Wedded
early to the wife of his youth and his heart , he had gone to India in
the service of the Honourable , the East India Company . There by his
valour and talent he had rapidly acquired both wealth and position . But
during the twenty-first year an event occurred which gave him a distaste
for the land of his adoption , and he had come back to his native country
with the idea of settling down , far away from old memories and new
entanglements . 

In a duel which he had fought in India with a young man named Brown--a
brave youth of no position , who had offended Mannering by his attentions
to his daughter , and by establishing himself in his house as a friend of
the family--he had left Brown for dead on the field , hardly escaping
himself with his life from a sudden attack of the armed banditti who , in
the India of that day , were always hovering round desert places . The
shock of that morning had so told on the health of Mannering ' s wife that
she died shortly afterwards , leaving him with one daughter , Julia--a
proud , sprightly , sentimental girl , whom he had brought home , and placed
under the care of a friend named Mervyn , whose house stood upon one of
the Cumberland lakes . 

So it came about that when Mannering was in Scotland , he received a
letter from his friend which took him to Mervyn Hall as fast as
horse-flesh could carry him . 

His friend wrote , as he was careful to say , without his wife ' s
knowledge . Mr . Mervyn told Colonel Mannering that he was certain that
his daughter Julia was receiving secret visits from some one whom she
did not dare to see openly . Not only were there long solitary walks and
hill-climbings , but on several occasions he had heard up the lake at
midnight , as if under her windows , a flageolet playing a little Indian
air to which Julia Mannering was partial . This was evidently a signal , 
for a boat had been seen hastily crossing the lake , and the sash of
Julia ' s window had been heard to shut down at the first alarm . Mr . 
Mervyn said that , little as he liked playing the part of tale-bearer , he
felt that Julia was under his care , and he would not deserve his old
name of Downright Dunstable if he did not inform her father of what he
had discovered . Julia , he said , was both a charming and high spirited
girl , but she was too much her own father ' s daughter to be without
romantic ideas . On the whole , concluded Mr . Mervyn , it behooved the
Colonel to come at once to Mervyn Hall and look after his own property . 

This was the letter which , put into his hands at a seaport town in
Scotland , lost Mannering the estate of Ellangowan , and threw the ancient
seat of many generations of Bertrams into the clutches of the
scoundrelly Glossin . For Colonel Mannering instantly posted off to the
south , having first of all sent despatches to Mr . Mac-Morlan by the
untrustworthy postilion--the same who arrived a day too late for the
sale . 

When Colonel Mannering first went to Mervyn Hall , he could make nothing
of the case . Of course he believed Brown to have died by his hand in
India , and he could find no traces of any other man likely to be making
love to his daughter . Nevertheless he had brought back a plan with him
from Scotland , which , he thought , would put an end to all future
difficulties . The helplessness of Lucy Bertram had moved his heart . 
Besides , he was more amused than he cared to own by the originality of
the Dominie . He had easily obtained , by means of Mr . Mac-Morlan , a
furnished house in the neighbourhood of Ellangowan , and he resolved for
a time at least to repose himself there after his campaigns . His
daughter Julia would thus have a companion in Lucy Bertram , and it was
easy to provide the Dominie with an occupation . For the library of an
uncle of Mannering ' s , who had been a learned bishop of the Church of
England , had been willed to him . The Dominie was the very man to put the
books in order . So indeed it was arranged , after some saucy remarks from
Miss Mannering as to the supposed Scottish accent and probable red hair
of her companion . 

Then Colonel Mannering , accustomed to do nothing by halves , sent down
his directions about Dominie Sampson , whose heart indeed would have been
broken if he had been separated from the young mistress over whom he had
watched from childhood . 

 " Let the poor man be properly dressed , " wrote the Colonel to Mr . 
Mac-Morlan ,  " and let him accompany his young lady to Woodbourne ! " 

The dressing of Dominie Sampson was , however , easier said than done . For
it would hurt the pride of the Dominie to have clothes presented to him
as to a schoolboy . But Lucy Bertram soon settled the matter . The
Dominie , she said , would never notice the difference , if they put one
garment at a time into his sleeping room and took away the other . This
was what her father had always done when the wardrobe of his dependent
needed renewing . Nor had the Dominie ever showed the least consciousness
of the change . 

So said , so done . A good tailor , having come and looked Mr . Sampson
over , readily agreed to provide him with two excellent suits , one black
and one raven grey , such as would fit the Dominie as well as a man of
such an out-of-the-way build could be fitted by merely human needles and
shears . 

The Dominie , when completely equipped , made no remark upon the
change--further than that , in his opinion , the air of a seaport town
like Kippletringan seemed to be favourable to wearing-apparel . 

It was the depth of winter when the Mannerings arrived at Woodbourne . 
All were a little anxious . Even Dominie Sampson longed to be at his
books , and going repeatedly to the windows demanded ,  " Why tarry the
wheels of their chariot ? " But when at last they came , Lucy and Julia
Bertram were soon friends , while the Dominie stood with uplifted hands , 
exclaiming ,  " Prodeegious ! Prodeegious ! " as , one after another , the
thirty or forty cart-loads of books were deposited on the library floor
ready to his hand . His arms flapped like windmills , and the uncouth
scholar counted himself the happiest man on earth as he began to
arrange the great volumes on the shelves . Not that he got on very
quickly . For he wrote out the catalogue in his best running-hand . He put
the books on the shelves as carefully as if they had been old and
precious china . Yet in spite of the Dominie ' s zeal , his labours advanced
but slowly . Often he would chance to open a volume when halfway up the
ladder . Then , his eye falling upon some entrancing passage , he would
stand there transfixed , oblivious of the flight of time , till a
serving-maid pulled his skirts to tell him dinner was waiting . He would
then bolt his food in three-inch squares , and rush back to the library , 
often with his dinner napkin still tied round his neck like a pinafore . 
Thus , for the first time in his life , Dominie Sampson was perfectly
content . 



II . DANDIE DINMONT

But the story now turns to the young man Brown , or , to give him his full
title , Captain Vanbeest Brown , whom Colonel Mannering had left for dead
on an Indian field . He did not die , but he had been compelled to
undergo a long captivity among the bandits before he found his way back
to his regiment . The new Colonel whom he found in Mannering ' s place had
been kind to him , and he soon found himself in command of a troop of
dragoons . He was at present on leave in England , and , as he was
conscious that Mannering had no reason for his ill-will and apparent
cruelty , Brown felt that he on his part had no reason for standing on
ceremony with such a man . He loved Julia Mannering , and , to say the
least of it , she did not discourage him . So it was he who had played the
Hindoo air upon the lake--he with whom Julia had talked at her window , 
even as Mervyn had related in his letter to his friend Colonel
Mannering . 

When the Colonel and his daughter went away to Scotland , Captain Brown , 
having no relatives in the country , resolved to follow them . He set out
on foot , having for sole companion a little terrier named Wasp . On the
way he had to pass a long and weary waste of heath and morass . One house
alone broke the monotonous expanse . It was little better than a shed , 
but was sheltered by an ash tree , and a clay-built shed alongside served
for a rude stable . A stout pony stood tethered in front of the door , 
busy with a feed of oats . Stillness brooded all around . It was a poor
place , but Captain Brown had wandered too far and seen too much to care
about appearances . He stooped his head and entered at the low door . In
a few minutes he found himself attacking a round of beef and washing it
down with home-brewed ale in company with the owner of the pony tethered
outside , a certain Mr . Dandie Dinmont , a store-farmer on his way home
from a Cumberland fair . At first only pleasant nods passed between them
as they drank to each other in silence . 

Presently Brown noticed , seated in the great chimney , a very tall old
woman clad in a red cloak and a slouched bonnet , having all the
appearance of a gipsy or tinker . She smoked silently at her clay pipe , 
while the doubtful-looking landlady went about her affairs . 

Brown ' s terrier Wasp was the means of his striking up an acquaintance
with the sturdy farmer opposite , who , hearing that he had never seen a
blackcock , invited him forthwith to Charlies-hope , the name of his farm , 
where he promised him he should both see blackcock , shoot blackcock , and
eat blackcock . Dandie Dinmont was going on to tell Brown of his
wanderings , when the old crone in the red cloak by the side of the fire
suddenly broke silence by asking if he had been recently in Galloway , 
and if he knew Ellangowan . 

 " Ellangowan ! " cried the farmer ,  " I ken it weel ! Auld Laird Bertram died
but a fortnight ago , and the estate and everything had to be sold for
want of an heir male . " 

The old gipsy  ( who , of course , was no other than Meg Merrilies ) sprang
at once to her feet . 

 " And who dared buy the estate , when the bonny knave-bairn that heirs it
may any day come back to claim his ain ? " 

 " It was , I believe , " said Dandie Dinmont ,  " one of these writer bodies
that buy up everything , --Gilbert Glossin by name ! " 

 " Ay , Gibbie Glossin , " said the old witch-wife ,  " mony a time I hae
carried him in my creels . But maybe ye ' ll hae heard o ' Derncleugh , about
a mile frae Ellangowan ? " 

 " And a wild-looking den it is , " said the farmer;  " nothing but old ruined
walls . " 

 " It was a blithe bit once , " said the gipsy , as if talking to herself;
 " did ye notice if there was a willow tree half blown down , that hangs
over the bit burnie ? Mony is the time hae I sat there and knitted my
stockin ' . " 

 " The deil ' s in the wife , " cried Dandie;  " let me away ! Here ' s saxpence
for ye to buy half-a-mutchkin , instead o ' claverin ' o ' auld-world
tales . " 

The gipsy took the money from the farmer , and tendered in return this
advice :  " When Tib Mumps brings ye out the stirrup-cup , and asks ye
whether ye will gang ower Willie ' s brae or by the Conscowthartmoss , be
sure to choose the road ye _dinna_ tell her . " 

The farmer laughed and promised . But to Brown he said that after all he
would rather that Tib Mumps kenned where he was going than yon gipsy
queen , so he would e ' en hold on his way . 

Captain Brown soon followed on foot , but at the door he found himself
stopped by Meg Merrilies , who , with much earnestness , asked his name and
from whence he came . 

 " My name is Brown , " he answered , a little impatiently;  " I come from the
East Indies . " 


The old gipsy appeared disappointed by his answer , and Brown put a
shilling into her hand as he took his leave . However , he had not gone
very far , and was still in the heart of the morass , when he saw his late
companion of the ale-house engaged in deadly combat with a couple of
rascals , one of them armed with a cutlass , and the other with a
bludgeon . Brown ' s terrier Wasp ran forward , barking furiously , but
before Brown could come to his assistance the ruffians had got Dandie
Dinmont down , and the man with the bludgeon bestowed some merciless
blows upon his head . Then with a shout they turned their attention to
Brown , crying that  " the first one was content . " But Brown was a staunch
antagonist , and they soon found that they had met more than their match . 
Whereupon the leader bade him follow his nose over the heath , for that
they had nothing to say to him . 

But , since to do this was to abandon Dandie Dinmont to their mercy , 
Brown refused point-blank . Affairs were at this pass when Dandie , 
staggering to his feet , his loaded whip in his hand , managed to come to
the assistance of his rescuer , whereupon the two men took to their heels
and ran as hard as they could over the moor . 

Then the farmer , who knew their ways , bade Brown mount behind him on his
horse Dumple , for he warned him that in five minutes  " the whole
clanjamphrey " would be down upon them . And even as he spoke five or six
men made their appearance , running toward them over the moss . But Dumple
was staunch , and by dint of following the safest roads , and being left
to pick his own way in the difficult places , Dandie ' s pony soon left the
villains behind him . Then , following the old Roman road , they reached
Dinmont ' s farm of Charlies-hope , across the border , not long after
nightfall . 

A furious barking from innumerable terriers and dogs of all breeds was
their welcome . And soon Brown found himself within four hospitable
walls , where not only were his own wants satisfied , but the wounds of
the master of the house were bound up by his buxom wife . 

At kindly Charlies-hope , Brown remained several days , while Dandie
Dinmont showed him the best sport to be had upon the border . Together
they hunted the fox after the manner of the country--that is , treating
Reynard as a thief and a robber , with whom no conditions are to be
observed . Together they went to the night fishing , where Brown heard the
leisters or steel tridents ringing on the stones at the bottom of the
water , as the fishers struck at the salmon in the light of the blazing
torches kindled to attract the fish . Otter-hunting and badger-baiting
filled in the time , so that Brown had never been so well amused in his
life . But he begged from his host that the badger , which had made so
gallant a defence , should be allowed henceforth to go scot-free . Dandie
promised with willingness , happy to oblige his guest , though quite
unable to understand why any one should  " care about a brock . " When Brown
told this hearty family that he must leave them , he was compelled to
promise , over and over again , that he would soon return . The chorus of
Dandie ' s tow-headed youngsters burst into one unanimous howl . 

 " Come back again , Captain , " cried one sturdy little chap ,  " and Jennie
shall be your wife . " 

Jennie , a girl of eleven , promptly ran and hid herself behind her
mother . 

 " Captain , come back , " said a little fat roll-about girl of six , holding
up her mouth to be kissed;  " come back and I ' ll be your wife my
ainsel ' ! " 

It was hard to leave so hospitable a home to go where , to say the least
of it , one was not wanted . Especially was it so when the sturdy farmer , 
grasping Brown ' s hand , said with a certain shamefacedness ,  " There ' s a
pickle siller that I do not ken what to do wi ' , after Ailie has gotten
her new goon and the bairns their winter duds . But I was thinking , that
whiles you army gentlemen can buy yoursel ' s up a step . If ye wad tak the
siller , a bit scrape o ' a pen wad be as guid to me . Ye could take your
ain time about paying it back . And--and it would be a great convenience
to me . " 

Brown was much moved , but he could only thank his kind host heartily and
promise that in case of need he would not forget to draw upon his purse . 
So they parted , Brown leaving his little terrier Wasp to share bed and
board with the eldest of the Dinmont boys , who right willingly undertook
the task as a kind of security for his master ' s return . 

Dinmont conveyed his guest some distance , and afterward , from the first
Dumfries-shire town which they entered , Brown took a carriage to carry
him part of the way in the direction of Woodbourne , where Julia
Mannering was at present residing . 


III . IN THE LION ' S MOUTH

Night and mist stopped him after many miles of journeying . The postboy
had lost his way , and could offer no suggestions . Brown descended to see
if by chance , in this wild place , they were near any farm-house at which
he could ask the way . Standing tiptoe upon a bank , it seemed as if he
could see in the distance a light feebly glimmering . 

Brown proceeded toward it , but soon found himself stumbling among ruins
of cottages , the side walls of which were lying in shapeless heaps , half
covered with snow , while the gables still stood up gaunt and black
against the sky . He ascended a bank , steep and difficult , and found
himself in front of a small square tower , from the chinks of which a
light showed dimly . Listening cautiously , he heard a noise as of stifled
groaning . 

Brown approached softly , and looked through a long arrow-slit upon a
dismal scene . Smoke filled a wretched apartment . On a couch a man lay , 
apparently dying , while beside him , wrapped in a long cloak , a woman sat
with bent head , crooning to herself and occasionally moistening the
sufferer ' s lips with some liquid . 

 " It will not do , " Brown heard her say at last  " he cannot pass away with
the crime on his soul . It tethers him here . I must open the door . " 

As she did so she saw Brown standing without . He , on his part , 
recognised in the woman the gipsy wife whom he had seen on the Waste of
Cumberland , when he and Dandie Dinmont had had their fight with the
robbers . 

 " Did I not tell you neither to mix nor mingle ? " said the woman;  " but
come in . Here is your only safety ! " 

Even as she spoke , the head of the wounded man fell back . He was dead , 
and , before Brown could think of seeking safety in flight , they heard in
the distance the sound of voices approaching . 

 " They are coming ! " whispered the gipsy;  " if they find you here , you are
a dead man . Quick--you cannot escape . Lie down , and , whatever you see or
hear , do not stir , as you value your life . " 

Brown had no alternative but to obey . So the old gipsy wife covered him
over with old sacks as he lay in the corner upon a couch of straw . 

Then Meg went about the dismal offices of preparing the dead man for
burial , but Brown could see that she was constantly pausing to listen to
the sounds which every moment grew louder without . At last a gang of
fierce-looking desperadoes poured tumultuously in , their leader abusing
the old woman for leaving the door open . 

But Meg Merrilies had her answer ready . 

 " Did you ever hear of a door being barred when a man was in the
death-agony ? " she cried .  " Think ye the spirit could win away through all
these bolts and bars ? " 

 " Is he dead , then ? " asked one of the ruffians , glancing in the direction
of the bed . 

 " Ay , dead enough , " growled another;  " but here is the wherewithal to give
him a rousing lykewake ! " And going to the corner he drew out a large jar
of brandy , while Meg busied herself in preparing pipes and tobacco . 

Brown in his corner found his mind a little eased when he saw how
eagerly she went about her task . 

 " She does not mean to betray me , then ! " he said to himself . Though for
all that , he could see no gleam of womanly tenderness on her face , nor
imagine any reason she should not give him up to her associates . 

That they were a gang of murderers was soon evident from their talk . The
man , now wrapped in the dark sea-cloak , whose dead face looked down on
their revels , was referred to as one who had often gloried in the murder
of Frank Kennedy . But some of the others held that the deed was not
wisely done , because after that the people of the country would not do
business with the smugglers . 

 " It did up the trade for one while ! " said one;  " the people turned
rusty ! " 

Then there were evident threats uttered against some one whose name
Brown did not hear . 

 " I think , " said the leader of the ruffians ,  " that we will have to be
down upon the fellow one of these nights , and let him have it well ! " 

After a while the carousing bandits called for what they called  " Black
Peter . " It was time  ( they said )  " to flick it open . " 

To Brown ' s surprise and indignation , Black Peter proved to be nothing
else than his own portmanteau , which gave him reasons for some very dark
thoughts as to the fate of his postboy . He watched the rascals force his
bag open and coolly divide all that was in it among them . Yet he dared
not utter a word , well aware that had he done so , the next moment a
knife would have been at his throat . 

At last , to his great relief , Brown saw them make their preparations for
departure . He was left alone with the dead man and the old woman . 

Meg Merrilies waited till the first sun of the winter ' s morn had come , 
lest one of the revellers of the night should take it into his head to
turn back . Then she led Brown by a difficult and precipitous path , till
she could point out to him , on the other side of some dense plantations , 
the road to Kippletringan . 

 " And here , " said she , mysteriously putting a large leathern purse into
his hand ,  " is what will in some degree repay the many alms your house
has given me and mine ! " 

She was gone before he could reply , and when Brown opened the purse , he
was astonished to find in it gold to the amount of nearly one hundred
pounds , besides many valuable jewels . The gipsy had endowed him with a
fortune . 


INTERLUDE OF LOCALITY

  " And all this happened here ? " repeated Sweetheart , 
 incredulously , pointing up at the dark purple
 mountains of Screel and Ben Gairn . 

  " Well , " I answered ,  " Scott ' s Solway is the Dumfries
 Solway , not the Galloway Solway . Portanferry exists
 not far from Glencaple on the eastern bank of Nith , 
 and the castle of Ellangowan is as like as possible
 to Caerlaverock . " 

  " But he _says_ Galloway ! " objected Sweetheart , who
 has a pretty persistence of her own .  " And I wanted
 Ellangowan to be in Galloway . What with Carlyle
 having been born there , the Dumfries folk have
 quite enough to be proud of ! " 

  " Yes , Scott _says_ Ellangowan is in Galloway , " said
 I ,  " but nevertheless to any one who knows the
 country , it remains obstinately in Dumfries-shire . 
 His swamps and morasses are those of Lochar . The
 frith is the Dumfries-shire Solway , the castle a
 Dumfries-shire castle , and what Scott put in of
 Galloway tradition was sent him by his friend the
 Castle Douglas exciseman . " 

  " Oh ! " said Sweetheart , a little ruefully ,  " but are
 you sure ? " 

  " Certain , " I answered ,  " if you consider time and
 distance from the border--say from Charlies-hope , 
 you will see that Brown could not possibly have
 reached the heart of Galloway . Besides , Scott was
 far too wise a man to write about what he did not
 know . So he wove in Train ' s Galloway legends , but
 he put the people into his own well-kenned dresses , 
 and set them to act their parts under familiar
 skies . Hence it is , that though the taste of Scott
 was never stronger than in _Guy Mannering_ , the
 flavour of Galloway is somehow not in the mouth ! " 

  " What does it matter where it all happened ? " cried
 Hugh John;  " it is a rattling good tale , anyway , and
 if the Man-who-Wrote-It imagined that it all
 happened in Galloway , surely _we_ can ! " 

 This being both sensible and unanswerable , the
 party scattered to improvise old castles of
 Ellangowan , and to squabble for what was to them
 the only wholly desirable part , that of Dirk
 Hatteraick . The combat between the smuggler and the
 exciseman was executed with particular zeal and
 spirit , Sir Toady Lion prancing and curvetting , as
 Frank Kennedy , on an invisible steed , with Maid
 Margaret before him on the saddle . So active was
 the fight indeed , that the bold bad smuggler , Dirk , 
 assailed as to the upper part of his body by Sir
 Toady , and with the Heir tugging at his legs , found
 himself presently worsted and precipitated over the
 cliff in place of Frank Kennedy . This ending
 considerably disarranged the story , so that it was
 with no little trouble that the pair of strutting
 victors were induced to  " play by the book , " and to
 accept  ( severally ) death and captivity in the hold
 of the smuggling lugger . 

 On the other hand , after I had read the
 Twenty-seventh and Twenty-eighth Chapters of _Guy
 Mannering_ to them in the original , it was
 remarkable with what accuracy of detail Sweetheart
 wrapped a plaid about her and played the witch , Meg
 Merrilies , singing wild dirges over an imaginary
 dead body , while Hugh John hid among the straw till
 Sir Toady and Maid Margaret rushed in with
 incredible hubbub and sat down to carouse like a
 real gang of the most desperate characters . 

 Seated on a barrel of gunpowder , Sir Toady declared
 that he smelt traitors in the camp , whereupon he
 held a  ( paper ) knife aloft in the air , and cried , 
  " If any deceive us or betray the gang , we will
 destroy them--_thus ! _ " 

  " Yes , " chimed in the rosebud mouth of Maid
 Margaret ,  " and us will chop them into teeny-weeny
 little bits wif a sausage minchine , and feed them
 to our b-r-r-lood-hounds ! " 

  " Little monsters ! " cried Sweetheart , for the moment
 forgetting her proper character of witch-wife . 
 Nevertheless , all in the Kairn of Derncleugh were
 happy , save Hugh John , who declared that Scott ' s
 heroes were always getting put under soft cushions
 or up the chimney .  " You can ' t really distinguish
 yourself , " he insisted ,  " in such situations ! " And
 he referred once more to the luck of a certain Mr . 
 James Hawkins , ship ' s boy , late of  " Treasure
 Island . " 

  " It ' s the nobodies that have all the fun--real
 heroes don ' t count ! " he continued ruefully , as he
 dusted himself from the bits of straw . 

  " Wait , " said I;  " you have not heard the third tale
 from Guy Mannering . Then there will be lots for you
 to do ! " 

  " High time ! " he answered with awful irony . 


