Of all the nobles of Britain none was so strong as Rohand , Earl of
Warwick , Rockingham , and Oxford . He made just laws , and made them to be
obeyed; nor king nor baron in the land could buy his favour with fine
words or gold , or shield the wrong-doer from his punishment . Passing
fair was Felice , his daughter , like some stately marble shaft of perfect
mould; haughty was she as the great gerfalcon which spurns the earth and
towers up into the noon to look the burning sun in the face . Wise
masters , hoar with learning , came out from Toulouse to teach her the
seven arts and sciences , until there was not her like for wisdom
anywhere . 

Earl Rohand had a favourite page , named Guy , son of his just and upright
steward , Segard of Wallingford; a brave and fearless youth , of strong
and well-knit frame , whom Heraud of Ardenne , his tutor , taught betimes
to just with lance and sword , and how to hunt with hawk and hound by
wood and river side . 

It was the feast of Pentecost , when by old custom every maiden chose her
love and every knight his leman . Guy , clad in a new silken dress , being
made cup-bearer at the banquet table , saw for the first time the
beautiful Felice , as , kneeling , he offered the golden ewer and basin and
demask napkin to wash her finger-tips before the banquet . Thenceforward
he became so love-stricken with her beauty that he heard not the music
of the glee-men , saw neither games nor tourneys , but dured in a dream , 
like one crazed , all through the fourteen days festival . Knights and
fair dames praised his handsome figure and well grown sinewy limbs; he
heeded not--but once Felice gave him a courteous word as he offered her
the wine-cup; he blushed and stammered and spilled the wine , and was
rebuked for awkwardness . 

The feast being over , Guy went away to his chamber , and there fell into
a great love-sickness . Hopeless it seemed for a vassal to love one so
far above him as his sovereign ' s daughter; so he gave himself up to
despair , and his disease grew so sore that the most skilful leeches of
Earl Rohand ' s court were unable to cure his complaint . In vain they let
him of blood or gave him salve or potion .  " There is no medicine of any
avail , " the leeches said . Guy murmured ,  " Felice : if one might find and
bring Felice to me , I yet might live . "  " Felice ? " the leeches said among
themselves , and shook their heads ,  " It is not in the herbal . Felice ? 
Felix ? No , there is no plant of that name . " 

 " No herb is Felice , " sighing answered Guy ,  " but a flower--the fairest
flower that grows . " 

 " He is light-headed , " they said .  " The flower Felice ? He seeks perchance
the flower of happiness , growing in the garden of the blessed , away in
Paradise . He is surely near his end . " 

 " It is truly Paradise where Felice is , " Guy answered , 

 " You hear ? You see , " the leeches whispered one to another .  " Come , let us
go; for we can be of no more good . " 

Night came , and being left alone Guy thought to rise up from his bed and
drag himself into the presence of his mistress , there to die at her
feet . So weak was he become , he scarce could stand , but fainted many
times upon the way . 

Now Felice had heard many whisperings how Guy was dying for love of her , 
since her handmaidens had compassion on the youth , and sought to turn
her heart toward him; but Felice was in no mind to have a page for a
lover . Howbeit on this very night she had a dream , wherein being
straitly enjoined to entreat the youth with kindness as the only way to
save a life which would hereafter be of great service to the world , she
arose and came to a bower in the garden where Guy lay swooning on the
floor . Felice would not stoop to help him , but her maids having restored
him to his senses , Guy fell at her feet and poured out all his love
before her . Never a word answered Felice , but stood calmly regarding him
with haughty coldness . Then said one of her maids ,  " O lady ! were I the
richest king ' s daughter in the land , I could not turn away from love so
strong and true . " Felice rebuked her , saying ,  " Could not ? Silly child , 
see that your soft heart do not prove your shame . " So with a tingling
cheek the maid withdrew abashed . Then said Felice to Guy ,  " Why kneel
there weeping like a girl ? Get up , and show if there is the making of a
man in you . Hear what I have to say . The swan mates not with the
swallow , and I will never wed beneath me . Prove that your love is not
presumption . Show yourself my peer . For I could love a brave and valiant
knight before whose spear men bowed as to a king , nor would I ask his
parentage , prouder far to know that my children took their nobleness
from a self-made nobleman . But a weeping , love-sick page ! No ! Go , fight
and battle--show me something that you do that I can love . Meantime I
look for such a lover , and I care not if his name be Guy the page . " 

Then Guy took heart and said ,  " Lady , I ask no better boon than to have
you for witness of what love for you can do . " 

Felice answered ,  " Deeds , not words . Be strong and valiant . I will watch
and I will wait . " 

Then Guy took leave of his mistress and in the course of a few days
regained his health , to the surprise of all the court , but more
especially of the leeches who had given him over for dead , and coming to
Earl Rohand , entreated him to make him a knight . To this Earl Rohand
having agreed , Guy was knighted at the next feast of Holy Trinity with a
dubbing worthy a king ' s son; and they brought him rich armour , and a
good sword and spear and shield , and a noble steed with costly
trappings , together with rich silken cloaks and mantles fur-trimmed , and
of great price . Then bidding farewell to Segard his father , Sir Guy left
Warwick with Heraud his tutor , and Sir Thorold and Sir Urry for company , 
and having reached the nearest seaport , set sail for Normandy in search
of adventures wherein to prove his valour . 

They came to Rouen , and whilst they tarried at an inn a tournament was
proclaimed in honour of the fair Blancheflor , daughter to Regnier , 
Emperor of Germany , and the prize was the hand of the Princess , a white
horse , two white hounds , and a white falcon . So Sir Guy and his
companions rode into the lists , where was a great company of proven
knights and champions . Three days they tourneyed , but none could
withstand Sir Guy ' s strong arm . He overthrew Otho Duke of Pavia , Sir
Garie the Emperor ' s son , Regnier Duke of Sessoyne , the Duke of Lowayne , 
and many more , till not a man was left who dared encounter him; and
being master of the field , he was adjudged the prize . The horse and
hounds and falcon he sent by two messengers to Felice in England as
trophies of his valour . Then he knelt before the beautiful Princess
Blancheflor and said ,  " Lady , I battle in honour of my mistress , the
peerless Felice , and am her servant , " whereat the Emperor and his
daughter , admiring his constancy , loaded him with rich presents and
allowed him to depart . 

Sir Guy then travelled through Spain , Lombardy , and Almayne , into far
lands; and wheresoever a tournament was held , there he went and justed , 
coming out victor from them all; till the fame of his exploits spread
over Christendom . So a year passed , and he returned to England
unconquered , and renowned as the most valiant knight of his time . A
while he sojourned in London with King Athelstan , who rejoiced to do him
honour; then he came to Warwick , where he received from Earl Rohand a
princely welcome . Then Sir Guy hastened to Felice . 

 " Fair mistress , " said he ,  " have I now won your love ? You have heard my
deeds , how I have travelled all through Christendom , and have yet found
no man stand against my spear . I have been faithful in my love , Felice , 
as well as strong in fight . I might have wedded with the best . King ' s
daughters and princesses were prizes in the tournaments; but I had no
mind for any prize but thee . Say , is it mine , sweet mistress ? " 

Then Felice kissed her knight and answered ,  " Right nobly have you won my
love and worship , brave Sir Guy . You are more than my peer; you are
become my sovereign; and my love pays willing homage to its lord . But
for this same cause I will not wed you yet . I will not have men point at
me and say ,  ' There is a woman who for selfish love ' s sake , wedded the
knight of most renown in Christendom ere yet he did his bravest
deeds-drew him from his level to her own-made him lay by his sword and
spear for the slothful pleasures of a wedded life , and dwarfed a brave
man down to a soft gentleman . ' Nay , dear one , I can wait , and very
proudly , knowing myself your chiefest prize . But seek not to possess the
prize too soon , lest your strivings for renown , being aimless , should
wax feeble . It is because I love you that I hold your fame far dearer
than my love . Go rather forth again , travel through heathen lands , 
defend the weak against the strong; go , battle for the right , show
yourself the matchless knight you are; and God and my love go with
thee . " 

Then Sir Guy got him ready for his new quest . Earl Rohand tried to
persuade him to remain at home , as likewise did his father Segard; and
his mother , weeping , prayed him stay . She said ,  " Another year it may not
fare so well with thee , my son . Leave well alone . Felice is cold and
proud and cares not for thee , else she would not risk thy life again . 
What is it to her ? If thou wert slain she would get another lover; we
have no more sons . " 

Yet would not Sir Guy be turned from his purpose , but embarked with his
companions , Sir Heraud , Sir Thorold , and Sir Urry , for Flanders . Thence
he rode through Spain , Germany , and Lombardy , and bore away the prize at
every tournament . But coming into Italy , he got a bad wound jousting at
Beneventum , which greatly weakened him . 

Duke Otho of Pavia , whom Sir Guy overthrew in his first tournament at
Rouen , thought now to be avenged on him . So he set a chosen knight , Earl
Lombard , with fifteen other knights to lie in ambush in a wood and slay
Sir Guy; and as Sir Guy , with his three companions , came ambling slowly
through the wood , he smarting and well-nigh faint with his wound , the
men in ambush broke out from their concealment and called on him to
yield . The danger made him forget his pain , and straightway he dressed
his shield and spurred among them . 

Sir Heraud , Sir Thorold , and Sir Urry killed the three first knights
they rode against . Then Earl Lombard slew Sir Urry; and at the same time
Hugo , nephew to Duke Otho , laid Sir Thorold dead at his horse ' s feet . 
Then only Sir Guy and Sir Heraud being left to fight , Sir Guy attacked
Earl Lombard and smote him to the heart , whilst Sir Heraud chased Hugo , 
fleeing like a hound , and drove his spear throughout his body . Thus were
Sir Urry and Sir Thorold avenged . But one of the felon knights , called
Sir Gunter , smote Sir Heraud a mighty stroke when he was off his guard , 
and hewed his shield and coat of mail in pieces , and Sir Heraud fell to
the earth covered with blood and lay as dead . 

Thereupon Sir Guy ' s anger waxed furious at his master ' s death; and he
spurred his horse so that fire rose from under its feet , and with one
blow of his sword cleft Sir Gunter from his helmet to the pummel of his
saddle . As for the other knights he slew them all except Sir Guichard , 
who fled on his swift steed to Pavia , and got back to Duke Otho . 

Heavily Sir Guy grieved for the loss of his three friends , but most of
all for his dear master Sir Heraud . He sought about the wood until he
found a hermit . To him he gave a good steed , charging him to bury the
bodies of Sir Urry and Sir Thorold . From Sir Heraud ' s body he would not
part . Lifting the old knight to his arms , he laid him across his horse , 
and led the steed by the bridle-rein till they came to an abbey , where
he left the body with the abbot , promising rich presents in return for
giving it sumptuous burial with masses and chants . But Sir Guy departed
and hid himself in a hermit ' s cave away from the malice of Duke Otho , 
until his wound should be healed . 

Now there was in the abbey whither Heraud ' s body was taken , a monk well
skilled in leech-craft , who knew the virtues of all manner of grasses
and herbs . And this monk , finding by his craft that life still flickered
in the body , nursed and tended it; and after a long while Sir Heraud was
well enough to travel . Disguised as a palmer he came into Burgundy , and
there , to his great joy , found Sir Guy , who had come thither meaning to
take his way back to England . But they lingered still , till Heraud
should grow stronger , and so it fell out that they came to St . Omers . 
There they heard how the Emperor Regnier had come up against Segwin , 
Duke of Lavayne , laid waste his land , and besieged him in his strong
city Seysone , because he had slain Sadoc , the Emperor ' s cousin , in a
tournament . But when Sir Guy learned that Sadoc had first provoked Duke
Segwin , and brought his death upon himself , he determined to help Segwin
against his sovereign the Emperor Regnier . He therefore gathered fifty
knights together with Heraud , and coming secretly at night to the city
of Seysone , was let in at a postern gate without the enemy being aware . 
In the morning after mass they made a sally against their foes , which
numbered thirty thousand strong , and routed them , taking many noble
prisoners . Three times the Emperor came against the Greeks , each time
with a new army larger than before . Twice did Sir Guy vanquish the host , 
and drive them from the walls . The third time he took Sir Gaire , the
Emperor ' s son , prisoner , and carried him into the city . Then the Emperor
Regnier determined , since he could not take the place by assault , to
beleaguer it , and starve the town into surrender . And it was so that , 
while his army was set down before the walls , the Emperor hunted alone
in a wood hard by , and Sir Guy , meeting him there , gathered a branch of
olive tree , and came bending to the Emperor , saying ,  " God save you , 
gentle sire . Duke Segwin sendeth me to make his peace with you . He will
yield you all his lands and castles in burg and city , and hold them of
you henceforth in vassalage , but he now would have your presence in the
city to a feast . " So the Emperor was forced to go with him into the city
as a prisoner , albeit he was served with the humility due to a sovereign
both by Sir Guy and Duke Segwin ' s knights . Sir Gaire and the other
captive nobles came also and prayed for peace with Duke Segwin , for they
had been so well treated that they felt nothing but the truest
friendship for their captor . So it befell when the Emperor found himself
feasting in the enemy ' s castle , surrounded by the flower of his own
knights and nobles , and Duke Segwin and his band serving them humbly at
table as though they had been servants in place of masters , he was
touched by their generosity , and willingly agreed to a free and friendly
peace . And this was celebrated by the Emperor giving Duke Segwin his
niece to wife , whilst the Duke of Saxony wedded Duke Segwin ' s sister
amid great rejoicings . 

Now after this , learning that Ernis , Emperor of Greece , was besieged in
Constantinople his capital by the Saracens , Sir Guy levied an army of a
thousand knights and went to his assistance . Well pleased was Ernis at
so timely a succor , and he promised to reward Sir Guy by making him heir
to the throne and giving him the hand of his only daughter the beautiful
Loret . Then Sir Guy led the army forth from the city against the Soudan
and his host , and defeated them so badly that for some days they were
unable to rally their men for another encounter . 

In the meantime , one of Sir Guy ' s knights named Sir Morgadour fell in
love with the Princess Loret , and being envious of Sir Guy ' s
achievements as well as jealous of such a rival , he sought how to
embroil him with the Emperor and compass his disgrace . Wherefore one day
when the Emperor Ernis was gone a-rivering with his hawks , Sir Morgadour
challenged Sir Guy to play a game of chess in the Princess Loret ' s
chamber . They played there , Sir Guy not thinking of treachery . But
by-and-by the Princess entered , and Sir Morgadour after greeting her
took his leave quickly and came to the Emperor Ernis , telling him how
Sir Guy was alone in the chamber with his daughter . Ernis , however , paid
little heed to the tale , for he said :  " Well , and what of it ? Loret is
his promised bride , and Sir Guy is a good true knight . Away with your
tales ! " But Sir Morgadour was not to be baffled , so he went to Sir Guy
and said :  " Behold how little trust is to be placed in a king ! Here is
the Emperor Ernis mad wroth to hear you were alone with the Princess
Loret , and swears he will have your life . " Then Sir Guy in great anger
summoned his knights , and was going over to the Saracens , when , on his
way , he met the Emperor , who told him of the malice of Sir Morgadour and
all was made plain . 

But now the Saracens coming anew against the city , Sir Guy went forth to
meet them with many engines upon wheels which threw great stones
quarried from a hill . Sir Guy and his army again defeated the Saracens , 
insomuch that a space of fifteen acres was covered so thick with dead
that a man might not walk between , whilst the pile of slain around Sir
Guy reached breast high . So the Soudan and his host withdrew to their
camps . 

Then Sir Morgadour bethought him of another wile . The Soudan had sworn
to kill every Christian found in his camp , without regard to flag of
truce or ambassage . So Sir Morgadour persuaded Ernis to send Sir Guy to
the Soudan saying , that , since the war seemed likely to come to no
speedy issue , it should be settled by single combat between two
champions chosen from the Christian and the Saracen hosts . The counsel
seemed good to Ernis , but yet he liked not to risk his son-in-law ' s
life; wherefore he called his Parliament together and asked for some
bold knight to go and bear this message . When all the others held their
peace , Sir Guy demanded to be sent upon the business , neither could the
prayers and entreaties of Ernis cause him to forego the enterprise . He
clad himself in iron hose and a trusty hauberk , set a helm of steel , 
gold-circled , on his head , and having girt his sword about him , leapt on
his steed without so much as touching stirrup , and rode up to the
Soudan ' s pavilion . He well knew it from the rest , since on the top
thereof flashed a great carbuncle stone . 

There were feasting the Soudan , ten kings , and many barons , when Sir Guy
walked into the pavilion and delivered his message with great roughness
of speech .  " Seize him and slay him ! " cried the Soudan . But Sir Guy cut
his way through his assailants and rushing on the Soudan cut off his
head; and while he stooped to pick up the trophy with his left hand , 
with his right he slew six Saracens , then fought his passage past them
all to the tent door , and leapt upon his horse . But the whole Saracen
host being roused he never would have got back for all his bravery , but
that Heraud within the city saw in a dream the danger he was in , and
assembling the Greek army and Sir Guy ' s knights , came to his rescue and
put the Saracens to flight . Then after the battle , Sir Guy came in
triumph to Constantinople and laid the Soudan ' s head at the feet of the
Emperor Ernis . 

Ernis now , being at peace from his enemies , would take Sir Guy through
his realms . On their way they saw a dragon fighting a lion , and the lion
having much the worst of the combat , Sir Guy must needs go and fight the
dragon . After a hard battle he laid the monster dead at his feet , and
the lion came and licked the hands of his deliverer , and would in no
wise depart from his side . 

Soon afterward the Emperor Ernis gathered a great company of princes , 
dukes , earls , barons , bishops , abbots , and priors to the wedding feast , 
and in presence of them all he gave Sir Guy to be ruler over half the
kingdom , and led forth the Princess Loret to be his bride . 

But when Sir Guy saw the wedding-ring , his old love came to his mind , 
and he bethought him of Felice .  " Alas ! " he cried ,  " Felice the bright and
beautiful , my heart misgives me of forgetting thee . None other maid
shall ever have my love . " Then he fell into a swoon and when he came to
himself he pleaded sudden sickness . So the marriage was put off , to the
great distress of Ernis and his daughter Loret , and Sir Guy gat him to
an Inn . Heraud tended him there , and learned how it was for the sake of
Felice that Guy renounced so fair a bride , dowered with so rich a
kingdom . But after a fortnight , when he could no longer feign illness
because of the watchfullness of the Emperor and the Princess after his
health , he was forced to return to court , and delay his marriage from
day to day by one excuse and another , until at length fortune delivered
him from the strait . The lion which Sir Guy had tamed was used to roam
about the palace , and grew so gentle that none feared him and none
sought him harm . But Sir Morgadour , being sore vexed to think that all
his plans against Sir Guy had failed , determined to wreak his spite upon
the lion . He therefore watched until he found the lion asleep within an
arbour , and then wounded him to death with his sword . The faithful beast
dragged himself so far as Sir Guy ' s chamber , licked his master ' s hands , 
and fell dead at his feet . But a little maid which had espied Sir
Morgadour told Sir Guy who had slain his lion . Then Sir Guy went forth
in quest of Sir Morgadour , and fought with him and slew him . He had
forgiven the wrongs against himself , since he outwitted them; but he was
fain to avenge his faithful favourite . Now Sir Morgadour was steward to
the German Emperor Regnier . So Sir Guy showed Ernis that if he remained
longer at his court , Regnier would surely make war on Greece to avenge
his steward ' s death . Wherefore with this excuse he took his departure
and set sail with Heraud in the first ship he could find . They landed in
Germany , and visited the Emperor Regnier without telling anything about
his steward ' s death . Then they came to Lorraine . 

As Sir Guy took his way alone through a forest , having sent his servants
on to prepare a place for him at an inn , he heard the groaning of a man
in pain , and turning his horse that way , found a knight sore wounded , 
and like to die . This knight was named Sir Thierry , and served the Duke
of Lorraine . He told how he was riding through the wood with his lady , 
Osile , when fifteen armed men beset him , and forcibly carried off the
lady to take her to Duke Otho of Pavia , his rival Then said Sir Guy ,  " I
also have a score to settle with Otho , the felon duke . " Then he took Sir
Thierry ' s arms and armour , and went in pursuit of the ravishers whom he
soon overtook , and having slain every one , he set the lady on his steed
and returned to the place where he had left the wounded knight . But now
Sir Thierry was gone; for four knights of Duke Otho ' s band had come and
carried him off . So Sir Guy set down the lady , and started to find the
four knights . Having fought and vanquished them , he set Sir Thierry on
his horse and returned . But now Osile was gone . He searched for many
hours to find her , but in vain . So as nightfall drew on he took Sir
Thierry to the inn . There by good fortune they found the lady , Sir Guy ' s
servants having met her in the wood and brought her with them to await
his coming . A leech soon came and dressed Sir Thierry ' s wounds , and by
the careful tending of Osile and Sir Guy , he got well Then Sir Guy and
Sir Thierry swore brotherhood in arms . 

Soon there came a messenger , saying that Duke Otho , hotly wroth at
losing the fair Osile , had gone to lay waste the lands of Aubry , Sir
Thierry ' s father; the Duke of Lorraine was likewise helping him . 
Thereupon Sir Guy equipped five hundred knights and came with Sir
Thierry to the city of Gurmoise where Aubry dwelt . It was a well
ramparted city , and after being beaten in two battles with Sir Guy , Duke
Otho found , despite the larger numbers of his host , that he could not
stand against the courage of the little army and the valour of its
leader . Thinking therefore to gain Osile by treachery , he sent an
archbishop to Aubry , offering peace and pledging himself to confirm the
marriage of Sir Thierry and Osile , provided only that the lovers would
go and kneel in homage to their sovereign Duke of Lorraine . Thereon Sir
Thierry and his bride , together with Sir Guy and Sir Heraud , set out
unarmed , and after wending a day ' s journey out of Gurmoise , they met the
Duke of Lorraine , who embraced and kissed them in token of peace . But
Otho coming forward as if to do the like , made a sign to a band of men
whom he had in waiting to seize them . These quickly surrounded Sir
Heraud and Sir Thierry and carried them off; but Sir Guy with only his
fists slew many of his assailants , and broke away to where a countryman
stood with a staff in his hand . Snatching this for a weapon , Sir Guy
beat down the quickest of his pursuers , and made his escape . Duke Otho
cast Sir Thierry into a deep dungeon in Pavia , and meanwhile gave Osile
a respite of forty days wherein to consent to be his bride . But the Duke
of Lorraine carried off Sir Heraud . 

Weary and hungered , and vexed at the loss of his friends , Sir Guy came
to a castle where he sought harbour for the night . Sir Amys of the
Mountain , who dwelt there , welcomed him with a good will , and hearing
his adventures , offered to raise an army of fifteen hundred men to help
him against Duke Otho . But to this Sir Guy said nay , because it would
take too long . So , after a day or two , having hit upon a plan , he
disguised , himself by staining his face and darkening his hair and beard
and eyebrows; and setting out alone , came to Duke Otho with a present of
a war-horse of great price , and said ,  " You have in your keeping a
dastard knight by name Sir Thierry , who has done me much despite , and I
would fain be avenged upon him . " Then Duke Otho , falling into the trap , 
appointed him jailor of Sir Thierry . 

The dungeon wherein Sir Thierry was prisoned was a pit of forty fathoms
deep , and very soon Sir Guy spake from the pit ' s mouth bidding him be of
good cheer , for he would certainly deliver him . But a false Lombard
overheard these words , and thereby knowing that it was Sir Guy , ran off
straightway to tell Duke Otho . Sir Guy followed quickly and sought to
bribe the man with money to hold his peace , but without avail , for he
would go into the palace where the Duke was , and opened his mouth to
tell the tale . Then with one blow Sir Guy slew him at Duke Otho ' s feet . 
But Otho , very wroth , would have killed Sir Guy then and there , only
that he averred that this was a certain traitor whom he found carrying
food to the prisoner . Thus having appeased the Duke ' s anger , he gat away
secretly to Osile , and bade her change her manner to Duke Otho , and make
as though she was willing to have his love . The night before the day
fixed for the wedding , Sir Guy let down a rope to Thierry in his pit , 
and having drawn him up , the two made all speed to the castle of Sir
Amys . There , getting equipped with arms and armour , they leaped to horse
on the morrow , and riding back to Pavia , met the wedding procession . 
Rushing into the midst Sir Guy slew Otho and Sir Thierry carried off
Osile , whereupon they returned to Sir Amys with light hearts . And when
the Duke of Lorraine had tidings of what had befallen Otho he had great
fear of Sir Guy , and sent Sir Heraud back with costly gifts to make his
peace . So Sir Thierry and Osile were wed , and a sumptuous banquet was
held in their honour , with game , and hunting , and hawking , and justing , 
and singing of glee-men , more than can be told . 

Now as Sir Guy went a-hunting one day , he rode away from his party to
pursue a boar of great size . And this boar , being very nimble and fleet
of foot , led him a long chase till he came into Flanders . And when he
killed the boar he blew upon his horn the prize . Florentine , King of
Flanders , hearing it in his palace , said ,  " Who is this that slays the
tall game on my lands ? " And he bade his son go forth and bring him in . 
The young prince coming with a haughty message to Sir Guy , the knight
struck him with his hunting-horn , meaning no more than chastisement for
his discourtesy . But by misadventure the prince fell dead at his feet . 
Thinking no more of the mishap , and knowing not who it was whom he had
slain , Sir Guy rode on to the palace , and was received with good cheer
at the King ' s table . But presently the prince ' s body being brought in , 
and Guy owning that he had done this deed , King Florentine took up an
axe , and aimed a mighty blow at the slayer of his son . This Sir Guy
quickly avoided , and when all arose to seize him , he smote them down on
either hand , and fought his way through the hall till he reached his
steed , whereon lightly leaping he hasted back to Sir Thierry . 

Then after a short while he took leave of Sir Thierry , and came with Sir
Heraud to England , to the court of King Athelstan at York . Scarce had he
arrived there when tidings came that a great black and winged dragon was
ravaging Northumberland , and had destroyed whole troops of men which
went against him . Sir Guy at once armed himself in his best proven
armour , and rode off in quest of the monster . He battled with the dragon
from prime till undern , and on from undern until evensong , but for all
the dragon was so strong and his hide so flinty Sir Guy overcame him , 
and thrust his sword down the dragon ' s throat , and having cut off his
head brought it to King Athelstan . Then while all England rang with this
great exploit , he took his journey to Wallingford to see his parents . 
But they were dead; so after grieving many days for them he gave his
inheritance to Sir Heraud , and hasted to Felice at Warwick . 

Proudly she welcomed her true knight , and listened to the story of his
deeds . Then laughingly Sir Guy asked , should he go another quest before
they two were wed ? 

 " Nay , dear one , " said Felice ,  " my heart misgives me I was wrong to peril
your life so long for fame ' s sake and my pride in you . A great
love-longing I have borne to have you home beside me . But now you shall
go no more forth . My pride it was that made me wish you great and
famous , and for that I bade you go; but now , beside your greatness and
your fame , I am become so little and so unworthy that I grow jealous
lest you seek a worthier mate . We will not part again , dear lord Sir
Guy . " Then he kissed her tenderly and said ,  " Felice , whatever of fame
and renown I may have gained , I owe it all to you . It was won for you , 
and but for you it had not been--and so I lay it at your feet in loving
homage , owning that I hold it all of you . " 

So they were wed amid the joy of all the town of Warwick; for the
spousings were of right royal sort , and Earl Rohand held a great
tournament , and kept open court to all Warwick , Rockingham , and Oxford
for fourteen days . 

Forty days they had been wed , when it happened that as Sir Guy lay by a
window of his tower , looking out upon the landscape , he fell to musing
on his life . He thought ,  " How many men I have slain , how many battles I
have fought , how many lands I have taken and destroyed ! All for a
woman ' s love; and not one single deed done for my God ! " Then he thought , 
 " I will go a pilgrimage for the sake of the Holy Cross . " And when Felice
knew what he meditated she wept , and with many bitter tears besought him
not to leave her . But he sighed and said ,  " Not yet one single deed for
God above ! " and held fast to his intent . So he clad himself in palmer ' s
dress , and having taken a gold ring from his wife ' s hand and placed upon
his own , he set out without any companion for the Holy Land . 

But Felice fell into a great wan-hope at his departure , and grieved
continually , neither would be comforted; for she said ,  " I have brought
this on myself by sending him such perilous journeys heretofore , and now
I cannot bear to part from him . " But that she bore his child she would
have taken her own life for very trouble of heart; only for that child ' s
sake she was fain to live and mature it when it should be born . 

Now after Sir Guy had made his toilsome pilgrimage to Jerusalem , and
shrived him of his life , and done his prayers and penances about the
holy places , he took his way to Antioch . 

Beside a well he met a certain Earl Jonas , whose fifteen sons were held
in prison till he should find a champion to deliver the Saracen Sir
Triamour from the hands of a fierce and terrible Ethiopian giant named
Amiraunt . So Sir Guy took arms again , and rode into the lists , and
fought with Amiraunt and slew him; thus both Sir Triamour was delivered
from his enemy , and the sons of Earl Jonas were restored to him . After
this , Sir Guy travelled many years as a pilgrim of the Cross , till in
his wanderings , chancing to come into Almayne , he there fell in with Sir
Thierry , who , dressed in palmer ' s weeds , made sorry complaint . Sir
Thierry told how a knight named Barnard inherited Pavia in the room of
his cousin Duke Otho; and how Barnard , being at enmity with him because
of the slaying of Duke Otho , had never rested from doing him mischief
with his sovereign , until the Duke of Lorraine dispossessed him from his
lands and brought him into poverty . Howbeit Sir Guy would not reveal
himself , and Sir Thierry being faint and weary , laid his head upon Sir
Guy ' s knees , and so great a heaviness came over him that he fell asleep . 
As he slept , Sir Guy , watching him , saw a small white weasel creep out
from the mouth of the sleeping man , and run to a little rivulet that was
hard by , going to and fro beside the bank , not seeming wistful how to
get across . Then Sir Guy rose gently and laid his sword athwart the
stream from bank to bank; so the weasel passed over the sword , as it had
been a bridge , and having made his way to a hole at the foot of the hill
on the other side , went in thereat . But presently the weasel came out , 
and crossing the stream in the same manner as before jumped into the
sleeper ' s mouth again . Then Sir Thierry woke and told his dream .  " I
dreamed , " said he ,  " that I came beside a mighty torrent which I knew not
how to pass , until I found a bridge of shining steel , over which I went , 
and came into a cavern underground , and therein I found a palace full of
gold and jewels . I pray thee , brother palmer , read to me this dream . " 

Then Sir Guy said that without doubt it betokened a fair treasure hid by
a waterside , and with that showed him the hole under the hill whereat he
had seen the weasel go in . There they digged and found the treasure , 
which was very great; yet Sir Guy would have no share therein , but took
leave of Sir Thierry without ever making himself known , and came to
Lorraine the duke that was Sir Thierry ' s sovereign . 

Seeing a palmer the Duke of Lorraine asked tidings of his travels . 
 " Sir , " said the palmer ,  " men in all lands speak of Sir Thierry , and much
do blame you for taking away his heritage at the bidding of so false a
knight as Sir Barnard . And palmer though I be , I yet will prove Sir
Barnard recreant and traitor upon his body , and thereto I cast down my
glove . " Then Sir Barnard took up the glove , and Sir Guy being furnished
with armour and a sword and shield and spear , they did battle together . 
And in the end Sir Guy overcame and slew Sir Barnard , and demanded of
the duke to restore Sir Thierry to his possessions , which being granted , 
he went in search of the banished man , and having found him in a church
making his prayer , brought him straightway to the duke , and thus they
were made friends . And when Sir Thierry found who his deliverer was he
was exceeding glad and would willingly have divided all his inheritance
with him . But Sir Guy would receive neither fee nor reward , and after he
had abode some time with him at the court , he took his way to England . 

Now Athelstan was besieged in Winchester by Anlaf King of Denmark , and
could not come out of the city for the great host that was arrayed
against him , whilst all the folk within the city walls were famishing
for want of food and thought of nothing but surrender . Moreover King
Anlaf had proclaimed a challenge , giving them seven days ' grace wherein
either to deliver up the city keys , or to find a champion who should
fight against the great and terrible Danish giant Colbrand; and every
day for seven days ' the giant came before the walls and cried for a man
to fight with him . But there was found no man so hardy to do battle with
Colbrand . Then King Athelstan , as he walked to and fro in his city and
saw the distress of his people , was suddenly aware of a light that shone
about him very brightly , and he heard a voice which charged him to
intrust his cause to the first poor palmer he should meet . Soon after he
met a palmer in the city , and weening not that it was Sir Guy , kneeled
humbly to him , in sure faith in the heavenly voice , and asked his help . 
 " I am an old man , " said the palmer ,  " with little strength except what
Heaven might give me for a people ' s need beset by enemies . But yet for
England ' s sake and with Heaven ' s help I will undertake this battle . " 

They then clothed him in the richest armour that the city could furnish , 
with a good hauberk of steel , and a helmet whose gold circle sparkled
with precious stones , and on the top whereof stood a flower wrought of
divers colours in rare gems . Gloves of mail he wore , and greaves upon
his legs , and a shirt of ring-mail upon his body , with a quilted
gambeson beneath : sharp was the sword , and richly carved the heavy spear
he bare; his threefold shield was overlaid with gold . They led forth to
him a swift steed; but before he mounted he went down upon his knees and
meekly told his beads , praying God to succor him that day . And the two
kings held a parley for an hour , Anlaf promising on his part that if his
champion fell he would go back with all his host to Denmark and never
more make war on Britain , whilst Athelstan agreed , if his knight were
vanquished , to make Anlaf King of England , and henceforth to be his
vassal and pay tribute both of gold and silver money . 

Then Colbrand stode forth to the battle . So great was he of stature that
no horse could bear him , nor indeed could any man make a cart wherein to
carry him . He was armed with black armour of so great weight that a
score of men could scarce bear up his hauberk only , and it took three to
carry his helmet . He bare a great dart within his hand , and slung around
his body were swords and battle-axes more than two hundred in number . 

Sir Guy rode boldly at him , but his spear shivered into pieces against
the giant ' s armour . Then Colbrand threw three darts . The first two
passed wide , but the third crashed through Sir Guy ' s shield , and glided
betwixt his arm and side , nor fell to ground till it had sped over a
good acre of the field . Then a blow from the giant ' s sword just missed
the knight , but lighting on his saddle at the back of him hewed horse
and saddle clean in two; so Sir Guy was brought to ground . Yet lightly
sprang he to his feet , and though seemingly but a child beside the
monster man , he laid on hotly with his sword upon the giant ' s armour , 
until the sword brake in his hands . Then Colbrand called on him to
yield , since he had no longer a weapon wherewith to fight .  " Nay , " 
answered Sir Guy ,  " but I will have one are of thine , " and with that ran
deftly to the giant ' s side and wrenched away a battle-axe wherewith he
maintained the combat . Right well Sir Guy endured while Colbrand ' s
mighty strokes shattered his armour all about him , until his shield
being broke in pieces it seemed he could no longer make defence , and the
Danes raised a great shout at their champion ' s triumph . Then Colbrand
aimed a last stroke at the knight to lay him low , but Sir Guy lightly
avoiding it , the giant ' s sword smote into the earth a foot or more , and
before he could withdraw it or free his hand , Sir Guy hewed off the arm
with his battle-axe; and since Colbrand ' s weight leaned on that arm , he
fell to the ground . So Sir Guy cut off his head , and triumphed over the
giant Colbrand , and the Danes withdrew to their own country . 

Then without so much as telling who he was , Sir Guy doffed his armour
and put on his palmer ' s weeds again , and secretly withdrawing himself
from all the feasts and games they held in honour of him in the city of
Winchester , passed out alone and took his journey toward Warwick on
foot . 

Many a year had gone since he had left his wife and home . The boy whom
Felice had borne him , named Raynburn , he had never seen; nor , as it
befell , did he ever see his son . For Raynburn in his childhood had been
stolen away by Saracens and carried to a far heathen country , where King
Aragus brought him up and made him first his page , then chamberlain , and
as he grew to manhood , knighted him . And now he fought the battles of
King Aragus with a strong arm like his father Guy ' s , neither could any
endure against his spear . But all these years Felice had passed in
prayer and charity , entertaining pilgrims and tired wayfarers , and
comforting the sick and the distressed . And it was so that Sir Guy , all
travel-worn and with his pilgrim ' s staff in hand , came to her house and
craved an alms . She took him in and washed his feet and ministered to
him , asking oftentimes if in his travels he had seen her lord Sir Guy . 
But when he watched her gentleness to the poor and to the children at
her gate , he feared to break in upon her holy life , and so refrained
himself before her and would not reveal himself , but with a heavy heart
came out from the lady ' s door and gat him to a hermit ' s cell . There he
abode in fasting and in penitence many weeks , till feeling his end draw
near , he took the ring from his finger and sent it by a herdsman to
Felice .  " Where got you this token ? " cried Felice , all trembling with her
wonderment and fear .  " From a poor beggar-man that lives in yonder cell , " 
the herdsman answered .  " From a beggar ? Nay , but from a kingly man , " said
Felice ,  " for he is my husband , Guy of Warwick ! " and gave the herdsman a
hundred marks . Then she hasted and came to Sir Guy in his hermit ' s cell , 
and for a long space they wept in each other ' s arms and neither spake a
word . 

Weaker and fainter waxed Sir Guy . In a little while he died , and Felice
closed his tired eyes . Fifteen weary days she lingered sore in grief , 
and then God ' s angel came and closed her own . 


