All children who live close to Mother Earth come to know and to see the
fairies of the flowers , the woods , the rocks , and the waters . 

These fairies the Iroquois call the _Jo gah oh_ , or  " Little People , " 
because they are so small . The Little People can do wonderful things . 
Whatever they wish , they can do . They can fly through the air . They can
dart under or through the water , into the earth and through the rocks , 
as they please , for they wear invisible moccasins and travel in winged
canoes . 

Their wee babies are carried on the little mothers ' backs , --just like
the Indian ' s papoose . The little fathers have wonderful winged bows and
arrows , that can shoot any distance they wish . 


The Little People bring good luck to the Indians . Whatever Indian boys
and girls wish for , --if they wish hard enough , the _Jo gah oh_ will
bring to them . 

It is said that there are three tribes of these Little People , --those
that live in the rocks beside streams and lakes , those that hover near
the flowers and plants , and those that guard the dark places under the
earth . 

The rock Little People are very strong . They can uproot large trees and
can hurl great rocks . Sometimes they dare the Indians to a test of
strength with them . They also like to play ball with stones . 

The Red Children fear the Stone Throwers , as they call them . But they
love the little folk that help the flowers to blossom , and the fruit and
grains to grow and ripen . 

They remember these Little People in their Feasts of Thanksgiving , for
do the _Jo gah oh_ not help the sweet waters of the maple to flow ? Do
they not whisper to the growing seeds and show the way to the light ? Do
they not guide the runners of the strawberries , turn the blossoms to the
sun , and paint the berries red ? They also tint the grains , and give to
the corn its good taste . 

A third tribe of Little People dwell under the earth . They guard the
sacred white buffaloes , and keep the serpent monsters that live in the
darkness below from coming to the surface to the Red Children . 


There are trails that lead out to the sunlight , but the Little People
guard them close , although sometimes a great serpent will find the
trail of a spring , and will follow it and poison the waters . 

Often , at night , these elves of the dark come to the upper world to
dance with the other Little People . 

Wherever you find a tree in a deep , dark part of the wood , around which
no grass will grow , there you may be sure a dance ring has been formed . 
There the Little People have danced till the moon dropped out of the
sky . 



