The Iroquois Red Children are a grateful people . The true Iroquois never
rises after eating without saying ,  " _Niaweh_ , " which means ,  " I am
thankful . " The others reply ,  " _Niuh_ , " -- " It is well . " 

The Red Children never pick a flower without thinking how kind the Great
Spirit has been , to cause the flowers to grow . They like flowers , and no
matter how poor the Indian cabin , flowers are always to be found near . 

When the Iroquois pick fruit , they give thanks to the Great Spirit . And
always do they leave some , for the  " little brothers of the wood . " 

They do not try to pick every cherry or berry , or nut or apple , for
themselves . Fruits grow for the birds and animals as well as for men , 
and the little brothers of the wood must not be forgotten . Some of
everything that grows is left for them . 


During the spring and summer , the Iroquois give several thanksgiving
feasts . The first is early in the spring , at maple-sugar time . As soon
as the sap begins to flow , the Maple Feast is called . 

The Indians gather about a large maple tree . A fire is lighted near , 
upon which one of their number sprinkles tobacco . As the smoke rises , a
prayer of thanksgiving is made to the Great Spirit , for causing the
sweet waters of the maple to flow . Then the maple trees are thanked for
their service to men , and protection is asked for the trees during the
coming year . 

When  " the leaf of the dogwood is the size of a squirrel ' s ear , " it is
planting time . Then an Indian maid goes into the fields and scatters a
few grains of corn , asking the aid of the Great Spirit for the harvest . 
The Indian always plants his seed with the growing moon , that it may
grow with the moon . 


The next feast is the Strawberry Feast and Dance . 

The strawberry is one of the best gifts of the Great Spirit to his
children . So greatly is it prized that it is thought to grow on the Sky
Road that leads to the Happy Hunting Ground . An Indian who has been very
ill , near death , will say ,  " I almost ate strawberries . " 

When the strawberry ripens , the Red Children are happy . They sing their
praises to the Great Spirit and dance with joy . They remember the Little
People who have helped to make the berries beautiful , and they have a
song of praise and dance of thanks for them as well . Without the help of
the Little People , the strawberries would not be so sweet and ripe . 

At the time of the Harvest Moon comes the last feast of the summer . This
thanksgiving feast lasts four days . The Indians not only give thanks for
the ripening of the corn , but for every growing thing . Therefore this
feast is longer than the others , since it takes some time to name all
the good gifts of the Great Spirit to the Red Children , and to give
thanks for them all . 

There is a story[1] of the corn in which the Spirit of the Corn is a
maiden , not a handsome young chief , as one of the stories claims . This
Corn Maiden was one of three sisters , and was called _Ona tah_ . 

[ 1 : _Myths and Legends of the Iroquois_ , by Harriet Maxwell
Converse . ]

The three sister vegetables--the corn , the bean , and the squash--were
called the _Di o he ko_ , which means  " those we live on , " since they are
the life-giving vegetables . 

These sisters lived together on a hill and were very happy . But one day
_Ona tah_ wandered away in search of dews for her kernels . 

The Evil Spirit was watching . He seized _Ona tah_ , the Spirit of the
Corn , and sent one of his monsters to blight her fields . The killing
winds swept over the hill , and the spirits of the squash and bean fled
before them . 

_Ona tah_ was held for some time a prisoner in the darkness under the
earth , by the Evil Spirit . 


At last a sun ray found her and guided her back to her lost hilltop . 
There she found that her sisters had fled . She was alone . 

Then _Ona tah_ made a vow to the sun that she would never again leave
her fields . But she sighs for her lost sisters , and mourns the blight
that came upon her beautiful fields . For since the time when _Ona tah_
wandered away and left her fields , the corn has not grown so tall or so
beautiful as once it did . 



