
It was a long , long time ago , when the earth was very young . Trees and
flowers were growing everywhere , but there were no birds . One morning
the Great Spirit drew back the blanket from the door of his wigwam in
the sky . He looked upon the earth and smiled , for he saw that his work
was good . 

 " Today , " thought he ,  " I will make big butterflies , to fly in and out
among the beautiful trees and flowers of the earth . They shall sing as
they fly . " 

Then the Great Spirit spoke , and the tree tops were full of birds , --but
they had no feathers . 

All day he watched them fly and listened to their songs . But their naked
bodies and long legs did not please him . Before the sun had set he had
made feathered suits , of every size and color , to cover them . 

That night , as the birds hid their heads under their wings , the Great
Spirit spoke to them . He told about the feathered suits he had made for
them , and where these suits could be found . 

A council was called next day by the birds . They chose _Gah gah go wah_ , 
the Turkey Buzzard , to get the suits . He could fly over a long trail and
not be tired . 

The birds told him that if he would go , he might have the first choice
of the suits of feathers , but he must try on no suit more than once . 

Turkey Buzzard promised and set out toward the setting sun . Twice the
sun set , and three times it rose , before he found the feathered suits . 
There were many of them , and they were very beautiful . He could not make
up his mind which one he would like best to wear . 

Then he remembered that he could try on each suit of feathers once . So
he began to put them on . 

The feathers of the first suit were too long . They trailed on the ground
as he walked . Neither could he fly well in them . Turkey Buzzard laid
that suit aside . 

The next suit shone like gold . The feathers were a beautiful yellow . 
Turkey Buzzard put it on and strutted up and down the forest . 

 " Oh , how handsome I am ! " he said .  " But I must not keep this , for if I
did , I should shine so like the face of the Great Spirit , that all the
other birds would see me . " 

And he slipped off the suit of yellow feathers as quickly as possible . 

A third suit was of pure white feathers . Turkey Buzzard thought it
looked very beautiful . It was a perfect fit . 

 " But it will get dirty too soon , " he said .  " I will not choose this . " 

And this , too , was laid aside . 

There were not enough feathers in the fourth suit . Turkey Buzzard
shivered with cold . It was not warm enough . He would not have it . 

There were too many feathers , and too many pieces , in the fifth suit . It
took too much time to put it on . Turkey Buzzard did not want that . 

So he went from one suit to another , trying on and taking off . Always he
had some new fault to find . Something was wrong with each one . Nothing
quite pleased him . No suit was just right . 

At last there was but one suit left . It was not pretty . It was a plain , 
dull color , --and very short of feathers at the neck and head . Turkey
Buzzard put it on . He did not like it . It did not fit him well : it was
cut too low in the neck . Turkey Buzzard thought it was the homeliest
suit of all . But it was the last suit , so he kept it on . 

Then _Gah gah go wah_ , the Turkey Buzzard , gathered up the suits and
flew back to the bird lodge . He still wore the plain , dull-colored suit . 

The birds again called a council . Each was told to select a suit from
those that _Gah gah go wah_ had brought , and put it on . This they did . 

Then the birds in their beautiful feathered suits began to walk and fly
about the Turkey Buzzard , and to make fun of his plain , dull dress . 

But _Gah gah go wah_ held his head high . He walked proudly about among
the birds . He looked with scorn on their beautiful suits . After a time
he spoke . 

He said ,  " _Gah gah go wah_ , the Turkey Buzzard , does not want your
suits . He had the pick of them all . He likes his own suit best . " 

 Adapted from Erminie Smith ' s _Myths of the Iroquois_ . 



