
It was after the Great Spirit had made all the beautiful birds , that the
Evil Spirit came along . He saw the beautiful birds and heard their
beautiful songs . He saw that the earth people liked the birds and liked
to hear them sing . 

Now the Evil Spirit did not wish people to be happy , so he said ,  " I will
make a bird that will make people afraid . I will make a big bird that
will not sing , but will make a great noise . " 

So the Evil Spirit went to work . In a short time he had made a big bird , 
that could not sing , but could drum . 

The big bird flew away into the wood . That night a drumming noise was
heard in the wood . The people were afraid . They could not sleep , because
of the noise . 

In the morning , they went into the woods to search for the noise . Deep
in the forest could still be heard that strange drumming . They followed
it , until they came to a deep , dark place in the woods . There was a loud
fluttering and whirring of wings , and a great bird flew out from among
them , along the ground and over the trees . 

The people were afraid . They called to the Great Spirit to help them . 

The Great Spirit was near . He heard their cry , and went after the bird , 
for he was very angry . 

The Great Spirit said ,  " I will not have my people frightened by this
great bird; it shall die . " 

The big bird gave the Great Spirit a long chase . At last the Great
Spirit came upon it . He seized it , and threw it against a large tree . 

As the big bird struck the tree , drops of blood flew in all directions . 
They changed into smaller birds that went whirring into the woods , just
as the big bird had done . There they began to drum . 

Like the big bird , these smaller birds like to startle people . They
flutter out from under the leaves , and with a whirring noise they fly
far into the wood . There they perch on an old log , or a rock , and drum
with their wings . 

Some of the earth people say they are drumming for their mates . But
others still think that the birds drum to make people afraid . 

So this is how the Indians say the partridges came to be . This is why
they drum , and why some of the earth children still love to hunt
partridges . 


