Lord William sat alone in his grey northern castle . He had come
but lately from the sunny South , and the room in which he sat
struck chill after the sun-warmed rooms to which he had grown
used . Little joy had Lord William in his old grey castle , for his
heart was far away in the sunny South . 

All alone he sat save for his favourite bird , the gay goshawk . 
And it , for it loved its master well , blinked a tear from its eye
as it peered into Lord William ' s gloomy face , blinked and peered
again , so pale and lean had his master grown . 

 ' Now what ill has befallen , ' thought the bird , and it ruffled its
feathers in its distress . 

Lord William looked up and stroked the glossy plumage of his gay
goshawk . 

 ' Be still , my bonny bird , be still , ' said Lord William ,  ' and I
will smooth your ruffled wings . ' 

The goshawk blinked and peered more close into the tired face of
his master . Then he began to speak . 

 ' Have you lost your sword or spear in the tournament , have you
lost them in sunny England ? ' asked the bird ,  ' or are you pale
with grief because your true love is far away ? ' 

 ' By my troth ! ' cried Lord William ,  ' I have lost nor sword nor
spear , yet do I mourn , for my true love whom I fain would see . 

 ' You shall carry a message to her , my gay goshawk , for you can
fly over hill and dale . You shall carry a letter to my love , and
you shall e ' en bring me an answer , ' said Lord William ,  ' for you
can speak as well as fly , my bonny bird . ' 

 ' But how shall I know your true love ? ' said the bird .  ' Never have
I seen her face or heard her voice . ' 

 ' O well will you know my true love , ' cried Lord William ,  ' for in
all England lives there none so fair as she . The cheeks of my
love are red as the red red rose , and her neck , it is whiter than
new-fallen snow . 

 ' Near to her lattice window grows a birch , whose leaves tremble
in the breeze . There shall you sit , my gay goshawk , and you shall
sing to her as she goes to holy church . 

 ' With four-and-twenty maidens will she go , yet well will you know
my own true love , for she is the fairest of them all . You shall
know her , too , by the gold that bedecks her skirt , by the light
that glimmers in her hair . ' 

Then Lord William sat down and wrote a letter to his love , and
fastened it firm under the pinion of his gay goshawk . Away flew
the bird , swift did it fly to do its master ' s will . O ' er hill and
dale it winged its flight until at length it saw the birch-tree
that grew near the lady ' s bower . 

There , on the birch-tree , did the goshawk perch , and there did he
sing his song as the lady with her four-and-twenty maidens passed
beneath its branches towards the church . 

The sharp eyes of the goshawk glanced at each beautiful maiden , 
and quick was he to see Lord William ' s love , for sweet was she as
the flowers that spring in May . Gold was embroidered on her
skirt , sunlight glistened in her beautiful yellow hair . 

When another day dawned the gay goshawk left the birch-tree and
alighted on the gate , a little nearer to the lattice window where
sat the beautiful lady to whom he had been sent . Here again he
sang his song . Loud and clear he sang it first , loud and clear
that all might hear . Soft and sweet he sang it after , soft and
sweet that only Lord William ' s lady might catch the note of love . 
And ever , loud or soft , the last words of his song were these , 
 ' Your true love cannot come to you here . ' 

Then said the lady to her four-and-twenty maidens ,  ' Eat , my merry
maidens , eat and drink , for the feast is spread . I go but to my
lattice window to listen to the birds , for hark ! they are singing
their evensong . ' 

But in her heart the lady knew there was only one song she
longed to hear . Wide she opened her lattice window and , leaning
out , she hearkened to the song of the gay goshawk . 

 ' Sing on , ye bonny bird , ' she cried ,  ' sing on , for I know no song
could be so sweet that came not from my own true love . ' 

A little nearer flew the gay goshawk , and first his song was
merry as a summer morn , and then it was sad as an autumn eve . 

As she listened , tears dropped from the eyes of the beautiful
lady . She put out her hand and stroked the pinions of the gay
goshawk , and lo ! there dropped from beneath his wing Lord
William ' s letter . 

 ' Five letters has my master sent to you , ' said the bird ,  ' and
long has he looked for one from you , yet never has it come , and
he is weary with long waiting . ' 

Then the lady sighed , for no letter had she ever had from her
true love .  ' My stepmother has hidden the letters , for never one
have I seen , ' she cried . 

Her fingers tore open the letter which had dropped from
beneath the bird ' s wing , and she read , and as she read she
laughed aloud . 

Lord William had written a letter that was full of grief , because
he could not come to the lady he loved , yet did the lady laugh . 
And this is why she laughed both long and glad . Because she had
made up her mind that as he could not come to her she herself
would go to Lord William . 

 ' Carry this message to my own true love , ' said she then to the
gay goshawk . 

 ' Since you cannot come to me , I myself will come to you in your
cold northern country . And as a token of my love I send you by
your gay goshawk a ring from off my finger , a wreath from off my
yellow hair . And lest these should not please you I send my
heart , and more than that can you not wish . 

 ' Prepare the wedding feast , invite the guests , and then haste you
to meet me at St . Mary ' s Church , for there , ere long , will you
find me . 

 ' Fly , gay goshawk , fly and carry with you my message to Lord
William . ' 

And the bird flew o ' er hill and dale until once again he reached
the grey northern castle in which his master dwelt . And he saw
his master ' s eye grow glad , his pale cheek glow as he listened to
the message , as he held the tokens of his own true love . 

Then the lady , left alone , closed her lattice window and went up
to her own room followed by her maidens . Here she began to moan
and cry as though she were in great pain , or seized by sudden
illness . So ill she seemed that those who watched her feared that
she would die . 

 ' My father ! ' moaned the lady ,  ' tell my father that I am ill; bid
him come to me without delay . ' 

Up to her room hastened her father , and sorely did he grieve when
he saw that his daughter was so ill . 

 ' Father , dear father , ' she cried , holding his strong hand in her
pale white one ,  ' grant me a boon ere I die . ' 

 ' An you ask not for the lord who lives in the cold north country , 
my daughter , you may ask for what you will , and it shall be
granted . ' 

 ' Promise me , then , ' said his daughter ,  ' that though I die here in
the sunny South , you will carry me when I am dead to the cold
grey North . 

 ' And at the first church to which we come , tarry , that a mass may
be said for my soul . At the second let me rest until the bells be
tolled slow and solemn . When you come to the third church , which
is named St . Mary ' s , grant that from thence you will not bear me
until the night shades fall . ' 

Then her father pledged his word that all should be done as she
wished . 

Now as her father left her room , the lady sent her
four-and-twenty maidens down to her bower that they might eat and
drink . And when she was left alone she hastened to drink a
sleeping draught which she had already prepared in secret . 

This draught would make her seem as one who was dead . And indeed
no sooner had she drunk it than she grew pale and still . 

Her cruel stepmother came up into the room . She did not love the
beautiful maiden , and when she saw her lying thus , so white , so
cold , she laughed , and said ,  ' We shall soon see if she be really
dead . ' 

Then she lit a fire in the silent room , and placing some lead in
a little goblet , she stirred it over the flames with an iron
spoon until it melted . When the lead was melted the stepmother
carried a spoonful carefully to the side of the bed , and stood
there looking down upon the still white form . It neither moved
nor moaned . 

 ' She is not dead , ' murmured the cruel woman to herself;  ' she
deceives us , that she may be carried away to the land of her own
true love . She will not lie there silent long . ' And she let some
drops of the burning lead fall on to the heart of the quiet
maiden . Yet still the maiden never moved nor cried . 

 ' Send for her father , ' shouted the cruel stepmother , going to the
door of the little room , for now she believed the maiden was
really dead . 

 ' Alas , alas ! ' cried her father when he came and saw his daughter
lying on her white bed , so pale , so cold .  ' Alas , alas , my child
is dead indeed ! ' 

Then her seven brothers wept for their beautiful sister; but when
they had dried their tears , they arose and went into the forest . 
There they cut down a tall oak-tree and made a bier for the
maiden , and they covered the oak with silver . 

Her seven sisters wept for their beautiful sister when they saw
that she neither stirred nor moaned . They wept , but when they had
dried their tears they arose and sewed a shroud for the maiden , 
and at each stitch they took they fastened into it a little
silver bell . 

Now the duke , her father , had pledged his word that his daughter
should be carried , ere she was buried , to St . Mary ' s Church . Her
seven brothers therefore set out on the long sad journey toward the
gloomy north country , carrying their sister in the silver-mounted
bier . She was clad in the shroud her seven sisters had sewed , and
the silver bells tinkled softly at each step her seven strong
brothers took along the road . 

The stepmother had no tears to shed . Indeed she had no time to
weep , for she must keep strict watch over the dead maiden ' s seven
sisters , lest they too grew ill and thus escaped her power . 

As for the poor old father , he shut himself up alone to grieve
for his dear lost child . 

When the seven brothers reached the first church , they remembered
their father ' s promise to their sister . They set down the bier
and waited , that a mass might be sung for the lady ' s soul . 

Then on again they journeyed until before them they saw another
church . 

 ' Here will we rest until the bell has been tolled , ' they said , 
and again the bier was placed in the holy church . 

 ' We will come to St . Mary ' s ere we tarry again , ' said the seven
brothers , and there they knew that their journey would be over . 
Yet little did they know in how strange a way it would end . 

Slow and careful were the brothers ' steps as they drew near to
the church of St . Mary , slow and sad , for there they must part
from their beautiful pale sister . 

The chime of the silver bells floated on the still air , dulling
the sound of the seven strong brothers ' footsteps . 

They were close to St . Mary ' s now , and as they laid the bier down
the brothers started , for out of the shadows crept tall armed
men , and in their midst stood Lord William . He had come as he had
been bidden to meet his bride . The brothers knew him well , the
lord from the cold grey country , who had stolen the heart of
their beautiful sister . 

 ' Stand back , ' commanded Lord William , and his voice was stern , 
for not thus had he thought to meet the lady he loved .  ' Stand
back and let me look once more upon the face of my own true
love . ' 

Then the seven brothers , though they had but little goodwill for
the northern lord , lifted the bier and laid it at his feet , that
once again he might look upon the face of their pale cold sister . 

And lo ! as Lord William took the hand , the cold white hand , of
his true love in his own , it grew warm , as his lips touched hers
they grew rosy , and the colour crept into her cheeks . Ere long
she lay smiling back at her own true love with cheeks that
bloomed and eyes that shone . The power of the sleeping draught
was over . 

 ' Give me bread , dear lord , ' cried the lady ,  ' for no food have I
tasted for three long days and nights , and this have I done that
I might come to you , my own true love . ' 

When the lady had eaten she turned to her seven strong brothers . 
 ' Begone , my seven bold brothers , ' she cried ,  ' begone to your home
in the sunny South , and tell how your sister has reached her
lord . ' 

 ' Now woe betide you , ' answered her bold brothers ,  ' for you have
left your seven sisters and your old father at home to weep for
you . ' 

 ' Carry my love to my old father , ' cried the lady ,  ' and to my
sisters seven . Bid them that they dry their tears nor weep for
me , for I am come to my own true love . ' 

Then the seven brothers turned away in anger and went back to
their home in the South . But Lord William carried his own true
love off to the old grey castle where they were married . And the
gay goshawk sang their wedding song . 


