It is well known that the Good People cannot abide meanness . They like
to be liberally dealt with when they beg or borrow of the human race;
and , on the other hand , to those who come to them in need , they are
invariably generous . 

Now there once lived a certain Housewife who had a sharp eye to her
own interests in temporal matters , and gave alms of what she had no
use for , for the good of her soul . One day a Hillman knocked at her
door . 

 " Can you lend us a saucepan , good Mother ? " said he .  " There ' s a wedding
in the hill , and all the pots are in use . " 

 " Is he to have one ? " asked the servant lass who had opened the door . 

 " Aye , to be sure , " answered the Housewife .  " One must be neighbourly . " 

But when the maid was taking a saucepan from the shelf , she pinched
her arm , and whispered sharply-- " Not that , you slut ! Get the old one
out of the cupboard . It leaks , and the Hillmen are so neat , and such
nimble workers , that they are sure to mend it before they send it
home . So one obliges the Good People , and saves sixpence in tinkering . 
But you ' ll never learn to be notable whilst your head is on your
shoulders . " 

Thus reproached , the maid fetched the saucepan , which had been laid by
till the tinker ' s next visit , and gave it to the dwarf , who thanked
her , and went away . 

In due time the saucepan was returned , and , as the Housewife had
foreseen , it was neatly mended and ready for use . 

At supper-time the maid filled the pan with milk , and set it on the
fire for the children ' s supper . But in a few minutes the milk was so
burnt and smoked that no one could touch it , and even the pigs refused
the wash into which it was thrown . 

 " Ah , good-for-nothing hussy ! " cried the Housewife , as she refilled the
pan herself ,  " you would ruin the richest with your carelessness . 
There ' s a whole quart of good milk wasted at once ! " 

 " _And that ' s twopence_ , " cried a voice which seemed to come from the
chimney , in a whining tone , like some nattering , discontented old body
going over her grievances . 

The Housewife had not left the saucepan for two minutes , when the
milk boiled over , and it was all burnt and smoked as before . 

 " The pan must be dirty , " muttered the good woman , in great vexation;
 " and there are two full quarts of milk as good as thrown to the dogs . " 

 " _And that ' s fourpence_ , " added the voice in the chimney . 

After a thorough cleaning , the saucepan was once more filled and set
on the fire , but with no better success . The milk was hopelessly
spoilt , and the housewife shed tears of vexation at the waste , crying , 
 " Never before did such a thing befall me since I kept house ! Three
quarts of new milk burnt for one meal ! " 

 " _And that ' s sixpence_ , " cried the voice from the chimney .  " _You
didn ' t save the tinkering after all Mother_ ! " 

With which the Hillman himself came tumbling down the chimney , and
went off laughing through the door . 

But thenceforward the saucepan was as good as any other . 


