

Once upon a time a wicked nobleman rose in rebellion against his
rightful king , and taking the royal forces by surprise , defeated them
and seized the kingdom . The dethroned King , who had been severely
wounded in battle , was cast in prison , where he soon died; but his
widow , the Queen , managed to escape from the palace before the usurper
could lay hands upon her .

Into the dark forest which lay behind the palace ran the Queen , holding
her baby daughter in her arms . It was winter time , and a heavy snow had
hidden the foot-paths and the roads . Presently the Queen realized that
she was lost . All afternoon , however , she trudged bravely on through the
silence and the cold , her heart sinking as mile after mile revealed no
sign of a house or a shelter .

But late in the afternoon , when the red shield of the sun could scarcely
be seen through the tangle of the wild wood-branches , she perceived a
light coming from a little grove of cedars by the shore of a frozen
lake . The Queen made her way toward this light , and discovered a little
thatched hut in the silent wood; it was the house of one of the dwarfs
of the forest . The dwarf took pity on the Queen , but his efforts were
vain , for the poor woman was so weak and exhausted that she died without
telling the dwarf anything about herself or the child she carried .

So the little dwarf , who was a good , kind old fellow , brought the little
girl up as if she were his own child . His brother , the dwarf of the
mountain , made her the prettiest red-leather shoes , and his cousins , the
dwarfs of the pines , made the little girl dresses from cloth woven on
fairy looms .

Now , on the night her mother brought her to the hut , the little girl was
wearing a golden heart-shaped locket , with a crown and the letter M upon
it in diamonds . So the dwarf called the little girl Marianna .

Seventeen years passed , and Marianna grew to be quite the loveliest lass
in all the world . Her hair was as black as the raven ' s wing , her eyes
were as blue as the midsummer sea , and her skin was fair as the petal of
a rose . One spring morning a little yellow bird flew into the cedar
grove , and gave the dwarf a letter which it held in its beak .

The dwarf read the letter , and said to Marianna ,  " Little Marianna , the
Emperor of the Elves has bidden me come to the great assembly of the
dwarfs which is to be held next year on the Golden Mountain . Alas , what
are we to do ? I can not take you with me , dear child , for it is
forbidden on pain of death to bring mortals to the assembly , nor can I
leave you here in this lonely wood . "

To this Marianna replied ,  " Do not fear , dear father . Give me but yon
crystal flask of the water of healing , and I shall go forth into the
world until it is time for you to return again . Perhaps I shall discover
somebody who can tell me the meaning of this locket , or the history of
my dear mother . "

So the dwarf took his knotted staff , and went away over hill , over dale
to the Golden Mountain .

Then Marianna took the crystal flask of the water of healing , and walked
boldly out of the wood into the wide , wide world . It was the middle of
the spring , the ice and snow had all disappeared; the trees were putting
forth their leaves , and there were clusters of primroses by the
roadside . In the swaying , rustling heart of a great elm tree , a little
thrush was singing . Through cities and towns went lovely Marianna ,
bringing good cheer to the helpless and the sick , and curing all who
came to her , rich and poor , with the wonderful water of healing . But
never did she find anybody who could tell her about the gold heart with
the diamond crown .

Now it came to pass that , as Marianna was one day walking through a
village in the heart of the Adamant Mountains , a ragged old woman
besought her with tears to come to a hamlet which stood at the head of a
high and dangerous path . Touched by the old woman ' s supplication ,
Marianna followed her to the hamlet , and found in a wretched hut , lying
on a wretched bed , a beautiful young peasant girl dying of a fever . So
Marianna touched the girl with the water of healing , and in an instant
she became well and strong .

 " Dear lady , " said the peasant girl , pressing Marianna ' s hand to her
lips ,  " how sweet and kind thou art ! Great is the debt I owe thee . "

And as the girl poured out her thanks , Marianna heard a faint  " chirp ,
chirp , " and looking down , beheld a little yellow bird crouching on the
hearthstone . Every now and then he hid his head under his wings and
cried unhappily . It was the yellow bird which had brought the message
from the Emperor of the Elves .

 " Poor little bird , " said Marianna , bending down and taking him up in her
hands ,  " why criest thou so mournfully ? Who hath done thee harm ? "

But the bird uttered only a forlorn little cry , and hid his head again
under his wings .

 " I found him on the rocks at the mountaintop yesterday , " said the
mother .  " Someone has wounded him . His wing is broken . "

And she put the bird on the floor of the house and bade Marianna watch
how he fluttered trailing a wing in the dust . Again Marianna stooped ,
and picking up the bird , touched the wounded wing with the water of
healing . Scarcely had she done so , when the yellow bird burst into a
joyous and golden song , and flying to the window , beat madly against the
panes . Then the peasant girl threw open the casement , and the yellow
bird flew out into the streaming sun .

 " He is gone forever , " said the peasant girl .

 " Nay , he returns , " said Marianna , gently , as the yellow bird flew back
and perched in the sheltering bower of Marianna ' s arms . Then ,
accompanied by the peasant girl and the yellow bird , who flew singing
before her , Marianna went down the dangerous path to the high road in
the valley . When they reached the foot of the path , the peasant girl
cried : --

 " Farewell , dear Marianna; may it some day be mine to repay thee ! "

Into the world again went Marianna , and with her went the yellow bird .
Presently she came to the fairest land which she had ever seen , a land
of rolling fields , little hills , and rivers bordered with pale willow
trees . This pleasant land , unknown to Marianna , was part of her father ' s
kingdom , and she was really its queen because her father had been the
last rightful king .

Now while Marianna had been in the forest , the wicked nobleman who had
stolen the kingdom from Marianna ' s father had died , leaving his brother
Garabin in charge of the kingdom and of the interests of his little son ,
Prince Desire . This Garabin , however , taking advantage of the youth and
helplessness of his nephew , had himself assumed the state and airs of
king . For some time he had enjoyed undisturbed the possession of his
stolen throne; but as Desire grew taller and stronger every year ,
Garabin began to fear the day when he would be compelled to resign in
favor of his nephew .

When the Prince reached his twentieth year , Garabin would certainly have
killed him openly had he dared; but , fearing the people , he resolved to
use secret methods , and bribed a cruel magician to afflict poor Desire
with a deadly and mysterious malady . Of this malady , Desire was slowly
dying , for no medicine could cure him or even give him any relief from
his constant pain . Every morning the cruel Garabin , in the hope of
finding his nephew dead , would go to the sick room; and you may be sure
that his wicked heart rejoiced when he found the Prince weaker and more
feverish .

Garabin had just returned from a visit to the Prince , who was rapidly
failing , when the Captain of the Castle Guard came to him with the news
that the wonderful Marianna had arrived in the kingdom . The King gave
orders that she be brought before him . So Marianna , walking between two
halberdiers and followed across the courtyard by crowds of curious
people , was led before the King . The little yellow bird sat on
Marianna ' s shoulder , and never did maiden appear lovelier or more
gentle .

Scarcely had Garabin set eyes on Marianna , when he caught sight of the
golden locket which she wore about her neck . Had he not been very old
and crafty , he would have started from his golden throne , for he knew
that the little golden heart set with diamonds had been one of the crown
jewels , and that therefore Marianna must be the missing Princess , and
rightful queen of the kingdom .

What was he to do ? If he refused to let Marianna help the Prince , the
people might begin to suspect him , and start a revolution which would
thrust him from his throne; if he allowed Marianna to cure the Prince ,
the Prince would certainly demand the kingdom on his twenty-first
birthday . What was he to do with Marianna , whose right to the throne was
superior even to his nephew ' s ? Perplexed , and with fear in his heart ,
the King sought the cruel magician who had cast the spell on Desire .

The magician lived in a gloomy tower , and had an enchanted black dog
that he fed with flaming coals . He listened to Garabin ' s story , stirring
a great cauldron all the while , and said ,  " Do not fear . I will destroy
both claimants to the throne at once . "

Garabin rubbed his hands together with glee .

 " To-night I shall cast a spell of sleep on Marianna , steal the crystal
flask , empty it of the water of healing , and refill it with a liquid
which will cause death within a night and a day . I shall then replace
the flask before Marianna wakes . You will allow Marianna to visit the
Prince; she will touch him with the deadly water , and the Prince will
die . You can then try Marianna for having killed the Prince , and condemn
her to be thrown from the precipice . "

So pleased was Garabin with this horrid plot , that he could have danced
for joy . That very night , the magician filled Marianna ' s flask with the
poisonous water , and departed , thinking that nobody had noticed him . The
yellow bird , however , had seen everything , and followed the magician to
note where he hid the real water of healing .

The next morning Marianna was once more led before the King .

 " Welcome , thrice welcome , lovely maiden , " said Garabin with the most
dreadful hypocrisy .  " I have long hoped that you would turn your
footsteps hither , for my poor dear nephew , Prince Desire , only son of
the late King , has been ill for some months of a malady no physician can
cure . Perhaps you can cure him with the water of healing . "

Marianna replied that she would do her best to help the Prince; so the
Court Chamberlain gave her his arm , and escorted her to the Prince ' s
sick room . The King and many courtiers followed after him .

Desire lay in a great old-fashioned bed , his face flushed with fever . So
weak was the poor Prince , that he could scarcely lift his head to look
at his visitors . A great pity swept over Marianna ' s heart the instant
she saw him; as for Desire , he fell madly in love with Marianna at first
sight .

Now just as Marianna bent over the Prince to touch his forehead with the
water of healing , the yellow bird screamed and cried as madly as if he
were caught in a net . Marianna looked at the crystal flask . Nothing
seemed changed; the water within seemed as pure and diamond-like as
ever . She touched the Prince with the liquid . Alas , in a moment , so
terrible was the magician ' s poison that the Prince turned white as the
driven snow , and fell back on the pillows insensible . The lookers-on ,
who had expected to see him spring up entirely cured , began to murmur ,
and Marianna herself , terrified at what had happened , let fall the
flask , which broke into a thousand sparkling pieces .

Suddenly , Garabin cried at the top of his voice ,  " Seize the witch; she
has killed the Prince ! "

Presently there was a great confusion , rough hands seized Marianna , and
somebody caught the yellow bird . The Prince remained insensible on the
bed . At high noon , a trial was held , and since the doctors declared that
the Prince was dying , Marianna was condemned to be thrown from the
precipice . When somebody asked about the yellow bird , Garabin laughed ,
and gave orders that the cook should wring its neck , and toss it to the
cat .

So Marianna was hurried to a dark prison-room and loaded with chains ,
and the yellow bird was taken to the castle kitchen , and given to the
cook .

 " Here , you wring its neck , " said the cook to one of her helpers ,  " while
I go call the cat . "

By great good fortune , the cook ' s helper was no other than the peasant
girl whom Marianna had saved . This girl recognized the yellow bird , and
instead of wringing its neck , let it fly out of the window . The yellow
bird flew to the window of the magician ' s room . The magician was in the
chamber , stirring the giant cauldron . The bird flew to the window of
Prince Desire ' s room , and saw that he was still insensible .

An hour later the castle-bell began to toll , and a dismal procession was
seen walking from the castle toward the frightful cliff from which
condemned witches and sorcerers were thrown . First came a troop of
soldiers , then Marianna , weighted down with chains , and last of all , a
little group in which were Garabin , the magician , and some of Garabin ' s
favorites .

The bell kept on sadly tolling and tolling . It roused the Prince from
his swoon , and with his last measure of strength , poor Desire dragged
himself to the window . The procession was then passing directly
underneath the window , and Desire ' s eyes met the eyes of Marianna .

 " Stop ! Stop ! " cried the poor Prince , wildly;  " I forbid-- "

An instant later he sank fainting to the floor . The procession went on .

Meanwhile the yellow bird had returned to the magician ' s chamber . It was
empty . With a joyous cry , the bird fluttered through the window-bars ,
and discovered the phial into which the magician had poured the water of
healing . Clutching it in his claws , the bird flew once more to the
Prince ' s room . Desire still lay in a heap by the window , and over him
the yellow bird poured the contents of the phial .

The Prince sprang up , strong as a lion , seized his sword , and rushed
down to save Marianna . He arrived at the cliff just as the poor maiden
was about to be pushed off into space , and standing by her side , dared
anyone to lay hands upon her .

Garabin , seeing his precious plot miscarry , grew mad with rage .

 " Seize them , " cried he ,  " and toss them both over the precipice ! "

So the soldiers rushed at Marianna and the Prince , intending to carry
out their wicked master ' s orders . But even as they did so , there came a
flash of flame and the little dwarf , Marianna ' s foster-father , took his
place beside the lovers .

 " Cruel King ! " cried the dwarf sternly ,  " and thou , wicked and perfidious
magician , the hour of thy punishment is at hand . "

Immediately the sky grew black , the lightning crashed , and there arose a
terrible , howling wind . Three giant gusts drove fiercely by , the first
one blowing the King and the magician head-over-heels over the
precipice , the second carrying away the soldiers , and the third the
rascally favorites . When the sky cleared , only the dwarf , Marianna , and
Desire were left of the company .

 " Marianna , " said the little dwarf ,  " the Emperor of the Elves has told me
all your history , and it is thanks to him that I have returned in time ,
with the storm at my heels . You , Marianna , are the rightful Queen of
this country . "

 " Dear Queen , " said the honest and gallant Desire ,  " let me be the first
of your subjects to salute you . " And he knelt before her , and humbly
kissed her hand .

 " Nay , Prince , " said the young Queen , answering the adoring look in her
lover ' s eyes ,  " your father took the kingdom; if I were you , I should
take the Queen . "

Which was a bit forward , of course , but nobody minded that very much in
those fairy times .

So Desire and Marianna were married , and lived happily ever after . The
yellow bird went to the wedding , and when the ceremony was over rose
singing into the air , and flew joyously home to the land of the Elves .



