
There was a little stream in ancient times , in the north of Italy , 
which flowed eastward into the Adriatic Sea , called the Rubicon . 
This stream has been immortalized by the transactions which we are
now about to describe . 

The Rubicon was a very important boundary , and yet it was in itself
so small and insignificant that it is now impossible to determine
which of two or three little brooks here running into the sea
is entitled to its name and renown . In history the Rubicon is a
grand , permanent , and conspicuous stream , gazed upon with continued
interest by all mankind for nearly twenty centuries; in nature it
is an uncertain rivulet , for a long time doubtful and undetermined , 
and finally lost . 

The Rubicon originally derived its importance from the fact that
it was the boundary between all that part of the north of Italy
which is formed by the valley of the Po , one of the richest and
most magnificent countries of the world , and the more southern
Roman territories . This country of the Po constituted what was in
those days called the hither Gaul , and was a Roman province . It
belonged now to Caesar ' s jurisdiction , as the commander in Gaul . 
All south of the Rubicon was territory reserved for the immediate
jurisdiction of the city . The Romans , in order to protect themselves
from any danger which might threaten their own liberties from the
immense armies which they raised for the conquest of foreign nations , 
had imposed on every side very strict limitations and restrictions
in respect to the approach of these armies to the capital . The
Rubicon was the limit on this northern side . Generals commanding
in Gaul were never to pass it . To cross the Rubicon with an army
on the way to Rome was rebellion and treason . Hence the Rubicon
became , as it were , the visible sign and symbol of civil restriction
to military power . 

As Caesar found the time of his service in Gaul drawing toward
a conclusion , he turned his thoughts more and more toward Rome , 
endeavoring to strengthen his interest there by every means in his
power , and to circumvent and thwart the designs of Pompey . He had
agents and partisans in Rome who acted for him and in his name . He
sent immense sums of money to these men , to be employed in such ways
as would most tend to secure the favor of the people . He ordered
the Forum to be rebuilt with great magnificence . He arranged great
celebrations , in which the people were entertained with an endless
succession of games , spectacles , and public feasts . When his
daughter Julia , Pompey ' s wife , died , he celebrated her funeral with
indescribable splendor . He distributed corn in immense quantities
among the people , and he sent a great many captives home , to be
trained as gladiators to fight in the theatres for their amusement . 
In many cases , too , where he found men of talents and influence among
the populace , who had become involved in debt by their dissipations
and extravagance , he paid their debts , and thus secured their
influence on his side . Men were astounded at the magnitude of
these expenditures , and , while the multitude rejoiced thoughtlessly
in the pleasures thus provided for them , the more reflecting and
considerate trembled at the greatness of the power which was so
rapidly rising to overshadow the land . 

It increased their anxiety to observe that Pompey was gaining the
same kind of influence and ascendency , too . He had not the advantage
which Caesar enjoyed in the prodigious wealth obtained from the rich
countries over which Caesar ruled , but he possessed , instead of it , 
the advantage of being all the time at Rome , and of securing , by
his character and action there , a very wide personal popularity
and influence . Pompey was , in fact , the idol of the people . At one
time , when he was absent from Rome , at Naples , he was taken sick . 
After being for some days in considerable danger , the crisis passed
favorably , and he recovered . Some of the people of Naples proposed
a public thanksgiving to the gods , to celebrate his restoration to
health . The plan was adopted by acclamation , and the example thus
set extended from city to city , until it had spread throughout
Italy , and the whole country was filled with processions , games , 
shows , and celebrations , which were instituted everywhere in honor
of the event . And when Pompey returned from Naples to Rome the
towns on the way could not afford room for the crowds that came
forth to meet him . The high roads , the villages , the ports , says
Plutarch , were filled with sacrifices and entertainments . Many
received him with garlands on their heads and torches in their hands , 
and , as they conducted him along , strewed the way with flowers . 

In fact , Pompey considered himself as standing far above Caesar in
fame and power , and this general burst of enthusiasm and applause
educed by his recovery from sickness confirmed him in this idea . 
He felt no solicitude , he said , in respect to Caesar . He should take
no special precautions against any hostile designs which he might
entertain on his return from Gaul . It was he himself , he said , that
had raised Caesar up to whatever of elevation he had attained , and
he could put him down even more easily than he had exalted him . 

In the meantime , the period was drawing near in which Caesar ' s command
in the provinces was to expire; and , anticipating the struggle
with Pompey which was about to ensue , he conducted several of his
legions through the passes of the Alps and advanced gradually , 
as he had a right to do , across the country of the Po toward the
Rubicon , revolving in his capacious mind , as he came , the various
plans by which he might hope to gain the ascendency over the power
of his mighty rival and make himself supreme . 

He concluded that it would be his wisest policy not to attempt to
intimidate Pompey by great and open preparations for war , which
might tend to arouse him to vigorous measures of resistance , but
rather to cover and conceal his designs , and thus throw his enemy
off his guard . He advanced , therefore , toward the Rubicon with a
small force . He established his headquarters at Ravenna , a city
not far from the river , and employed himself in objects of local
interest there in order to avert as much as possible the minds
of the people from imagining that he was contemplating any great
design . Pompey sent to him to demand the return of a certain legion
which he had lent him from his own army at a time when they were
friends . Caesar complied with this demand without any hesitation , 
and sent the legion home . He sent with this legion , also , some
other troops which were properly his own , thus evincing a degree of
indifference in respect to the amount of the force retained under
his command which seemed wholly inconsistent with the idea that he
contemplated any resistance to the authority of the government at
Rome . 

In the meantime , the struggle at Rome between the partisans of
Caesar and Pompey grew more and more violent and alarming . Caesar , 
through his friends in the city , demanded to be elected consul . 
The other side insisted that he must first , if that was his wish , 
resign the command of his army , come to Rome , and present himself
as a candidate in the character of a private citizen . This the
constitution of the state very properly required . In answer to
this requisition , Caesar rejoined that , if Pompey would lay down
his military commands , he would do so too; if not , it was unjust to
require it of him . The services , he added , which he had performed
for his country demanded some recompense , which , moreover , they
ought to be willing to award even if in order to do it it were
necessary to relax somewhat in his favor the strictness of ordinary
rules . To a large part of the people of the city these demands
of Caesar appeared reasonable . They were clamorous to have them
allowed . The partisans of Pompey , with the stern and inflexible
Cato at their head , deemed them wholly inadmissible and contended
with the most determined violence against them . The whole city was
filled with the excitement of this struggle , into which all the
active and turbulent spirits of the capital plunged with the most
furious zeal , while the more considerate and thoughtful of the
population , remembering the days of Marius and Sylla , trembled
at the impending danger . Pompey himself had no fear . He urged the
Senate to resist to the utmost all of Caesar ' s claims , saying if Caesar
should be so presumptuous as to attempt to march to Rome he could
raise troops enough by stamping with his foot to put him down . 

It would require a volume to contain a full account of the disputes
and tumults , the manoeuvres and debates , the votes and decrees , 
which marked the successive stages of this quarrel . Pompey himself
was all the time without the city . He was in command of an army
there , and no general , while in command , was allowed to come within
the gates . At last an exciting debate was broken up in the Senate
by one of the consuls rising to depart , saying that he would hear
the subject discussed no longer . The time had arrived for action , 
and he should send a commander , with an armed force , to defend the
country from Caesar ' s threatened invasion . Caesar ' s leading friends , 
two tribunes of the people , disguised themselves as slaves and
fled to the north to join their master . The country was filled with
commotion and panic . The Commonwealth had obviously more fear of
Caesar than confidence in Pompey . The country was full of rumors in
respect to Caesar ' s power , and the threatening attitude which he was
assuming , while they who had insisted on resistance seemed , after
all , to have provided very inadequate means with which to resist . 
A thousand plans were formed , and clamorously insisted upon by
their respective advocates , for averting the danger . This only
added to the confusion , and the city became at length pervaded with
a universal terror . 

While this was the state of things at Rome , Caesar was quietly
established at Ravenna , thirty or forty miles from the frontier . 
He was erecting a building for a fencing school there , and his mind
seemed to be occupied very busily with the plans and models of the
edifice which the architects had formed . Of course , in his intended
march to Rome , his reliance was not to be so much on the force
which he should take with him , as on the cooperation and support
which he expected to find there . It was his policy , therefore , 
to move as quietly and privately as possible , and with as little
display of violence , and to avoid everything which might indicate
his intended march to any spies which might be around him , or to any
other persons who might be disposed to report what they observed , 
at Rome . Accordingly , on the very eve of his departure , he busied
himself with his fencing school , and assumed with his officers and
soldiers a careless and unconcerned air , which prevented any one
from suspecting his design . 

In the course of the day , he privately sent forward some cohorts
to the southward , with orders for them to encamp on the banks of
the Rubicon . When night came , he sat down to supper as usual and
conversed with his friends in his ordinary manner , and went with
them afterward to a public entertainment . As soon as it was dark
and the streets were still , he set off secretly from the city , 
accompanied by a very few attendants . Instead of making use of
his ordinary equipage , the parading of which would have attracted
attention to his movements , he had some mules taken from a neighboring
bakehouse and harnessed into his chaise . There were torch-bearers
provided to light the way . The cavalcade drove on during the
night , finding , however , the hasty preparations which had been made
inadequate for the occasion . The torches went out , the guides lost
their way , and the future conqueror of the world wandered about
bewildered and lost , until , just after break of day , the party met
with a peasant who undertook to guide them . Under his direction they
made their way to the main road again , and advanced then without
further difficulty to the banks of the river , where they found
that portion of the army which had been sent forward encamped and
awaiting their arrival . 

Caesar stood for some time upon the banks of the stream , musing upon
the greatness of the undertaking in which simply passing across it
would involve him . His officers stood by his side .  " We can retreat
_now_ " said he ,  " but once across that river , we must go on . " 
He paused for some time , conscious of the vast importance of the
decision , though he thought only , doubtless , of its consequences to
himself . Taking the step which was now before him would necessarily
end either in his realizing the loftiest aspirations of his ambition , 
or in his utter and irreparable ruin . 

There were vast public interests , too , at stake , of which , however , 
he probably thought but little . It proved , in the end , that
the history of the whole Roman world , for several centuries , was
depending upon the manner in which the question now in Caesar ' s mind
should turn . 

There was a little bridge across the Rubicon at the point where
Caesar was surveying it . While he was standing there , the story
is , a peasant or shepherd came from the neighboring fields with
a shepherd ' s pipe--a simple musical instrument made of a reed and
used much by the rustic musicians of those days . The soldiers and
some of the officers gathered around him to hear him play . Among
the rest came some of Caesar ' s trumpeters , with their trumpets in
their hands . The shepherd took one of these martial instruments
from the hands of its possessor , laying aside his own , and began
to sound a charge--which is a signal for a rapid advance--and to
march at the same time over the bridge .  " An omen ! a prodigy ! " said
Caesar .  " Let us march where we are called by such a divine intimation . 
_The die is cast . _ " 

So saying , he pressed forward over the bridge , while the officers , 
breaking up the encampment , put the columns in motion to follow
him . 

It was shown abundantly , on many occasions in the course of Caesar ' s
life , that he had no faith in omens . There are equally numerous
instances to show that he was always ready to avail himself of the
popular belief in them , to awaken his soldiers ' ardor or to allay
their fears . Whether , therefore , in respect to this story of the
shepherd trumpeter it was an incident that really and accidently
occurred , or whether Caesar planned and arranged it himself , with
reference to its effect , or whether , which is , perhaps , after all , 
the most probable supposition , the tale was only an embellishment
invented out of something or nothing by the story-tellers of those
days to give additional dramatic interest to the narrative of the
crossing of the Rubicon , it must be left for each reader to decide . 

As soon as the bridge was crossed , Caesar called an assembly of his
troops , and , with signs of great excitement and agitation , made an
address to them on the magnitude of the crisis through which they
were passing . He showed them how entirely he was in their power; he
urged them , by the most eloquent appeals , to stand by him , faithful
and true , promising them the most ample rewards when he should have
attained the object at which he aimed . The soldiers responded to
this appeal with promises of the most unwavering fidelity . 

The first town on the Roman side of the Rubicon was Ariminum . 
Caesar advanced to this town . The authorities opened its gates to
him--very willing , as it appeared , to receive him as their commander . 
Caesar ' s force was yet quite small , as he had been accompanied by
only a single legion in crossing the river . He had , however , sent
orders for the other legions , which had been left in Gaul , to join
him without any delay , though any reinforcement of his troops seemed
hardly necessary , as he found no indications of opposition to his
progress . He gave his soldiers the strictest injunctions to do no
injury to any property , public or private , as they advanced , and
not to assume , in any respect , a hostile attitude toward the people
of the country . The inhabitants , therefore , welcomed him wherever
he came , and all the cities and towns followed the example of
Ariminum , surrendering , in fact , faster than he could take possession
of them . 

In the confusion of the debates and votes in the Senate at Rome
before Caesar crossed the Rubicon , one decree had been passed deposing
him from his command of the army and appointing a successor . The
name of the general thus appointed was Domitius . The only real
opposition which Caesar encountered in his progress toward Rome
was from him . Domitius had crossed the Apennines at the head of an
army on his way northward to supersede Caesar in his command , and
had reached the town of Corfinium , which was perhaps one third of
the way between Rome and the Rubicon . Caesar advanced upon him here
and shut him in . 

After a brief siege the city was taken , and Domitius and his army
were made prisoners . Everybody gave them up for lost , expecting
that Caesar would wreak terrible vengeance upon them . Instead of
this , he received the troops at once into his own service and let
Domitius go free . 

In the meantime , the tidings of Caesar ' s having passed the Rubicon , 
and of the triumphant success which he was meeting with at the
commencement of his march toward Rome , reached the capital , and
added greatly to the prevailing consternation . The reports of the
magnitude of his force and of the rapidity of his progress were
greatly exaggerated . The party of Pompey and the Senate had done
everything to spread among the people the terror of Caesar ' s name
in order to arouse them to efforts for opposing his designs; and
now , when he had broken through the barriers which had been intended
to restrain him and was advancing toward the city in an unchecked
and triumphant career , they were overwhelmed with dismay . Pompey
began to be terrified at the danger which was impending . The Senate
held meetings without the city--councils of war , as it were , in
which they looked to Pompey in vain for protection from the danger
which he had brought upon them . He had said that he could raise
an army sufficient to cope with Caesar at any time by stamping with
his foot . They told him they thought now that it was high time for
him to stamp . 

In fact , Pompey found the current setting everywhere strongly against
him . Some recommended that commissioners should be sent to Caesar
to make proposals for peace . The leading men , however , knowing that
any peace made with him under such circumstances would be their
own ruin , resisted and defeated the proposal . Cato abruptly left
the city and proceeded to Sicily , which had been assigned him as
his province . Others fled in other directions . Pompey himself , 
uncertain what to do , and not daring to remain , called upon all
his partisans to join him , and set off at night , suddenly , and with
very little preparation and small supplies , to retreat across the
country toward the shores of the Adriatic Sea . His destination was
Brundusium , the usual port of embarkation for Macedon and Greece . 

Caesar was all this time gradually advancing toward Rome . His soldiers
were full of enthusiasm in his cause . As his connection with the
government at home was sundered the moment he crossed the Rubicon , 
all supplies of money and of provisions were cut off in that quarter
until he should arrive at the capital and take possession of it . 
The soldiers voted , however , that they would serve him without pay . 
The officers , too , assembled together and tendered him the aid of
their contributions . He had always observed a very generous policy
in his dealings with them , and he was now greatly gratified at
receiving their requital of it . 

The further he advanced , too , the more he found the people of the
country through which he passed disposed to espouse his cause . They
were struck with his generosity in releasing Domitius . It is true
that it was a very sagacious policy that prompted him to release
him . But , then , it was generosity too . In fact , there must be
something of a generous spirit in the soul to enable a man even to
see the policy of generous actions . 

Among the letters of Caesar that remain to the present day , there
is one written about this time to one of his friends , in which he
speaks of this subject .  " I am glad , " says he ,  " that you approve of
my conduct at Corfinium . I am satisfied that such a course is the
best one for us to pursue , as by so doing we shall gain the good
will of all parties , and thus secure a permanent victory . Most
conquerors have incurred the hatred of mankind by their cruelties , 
and have all , in consequence of the enmity they have thus awakened , 
been prevented from long enjoying their power . Sylla was an exception;
but his example of successful cruelty I have no disposition to
imitate . I will conquer after a new fashion , and fortify myself in
the possession of the power I acquire by generosity and mercy . " 

Domitius had the ingratitude , after this release , to take up arms
again , and wage a new war against Caesar . When Caesar heard of it he
said it was all right .  " I will act out the principles of my nature , " 
said he ,  " and he may act out his . " 

Another instance of Caesar ' s generosity occurred which is even more
remarkable than this . It seems that among the officers of his
army there were some whom he had appointed at the recommendation
of Pompey , at the time when he and Pompey were friends . These men
would , of course , feel under obligations of gratitude to Pompey
as they owed their military rank to his friendly interposition in
their behalf . As soon as the war broke out Caesar gave them all his
free permission to go over to Pompey ' s side if they chose to do
so . 

Caesar acted thus very liberally in all respects . He surpassed
Pompey very much in the spirit of generosity and mercy with which
he entered upon the great contest before them . Pompey ordered every
citizen to join his standard , declaring that he should consider
all neutrals as his enemies . Caesar , on the other hand , gave free
permission to every one to decline , if he chose , taking any part
in the contest , saying that he should consider all who did not act
against him as his friends . In the political contests of our day it
is to be observed that the combatants are much more prone to imitate
the bigotry of Pompey than the generosity of Caesar , condemning , as
they often do , those who choose to stand aloof from electioneering
struggles , more than they do their most determined opponents and
enemies . 

When , at length , Caesar arrived at Brundusium , he found that Pompey
had sent a part of his army across the Adriatic into Greece and was
waiting for the transports to return that he might go over himself
with the remainder . In the meantime , he had fortified himself
strongly in the city . Caesar immediately laid siege to the place , 
and he commenced some works to block up the mouth of the harbor . He
built piers on each side , extending out as far into the sea as the
depth of the water would allow them to be built . He then constructed
a series of rafts , which he anchored on the deep water , in a line
extending from one pier to the other . He built towers upon these
rafts , and garrisoned them with soldiers , in hopes by this means
to prevent all egress from the fort . He thought that , when this
work was completed , Pompey would be entirely shut in , beyond all
possibility of escape . 

The transports , however , returned before the work was completed . 
Its progress was , of course , slow , as the constructions were the
scene of a continued conflict; for Pompey sent out rafts and galleys
against them every day , and the workmen had thus to build in the
midst of continual interruptions , sometimes from showers of darts , 
arrows , and javelins , sometimes from the conflagrations of fireships , 
and sometimes from the terrible concussions of great vessels of
war , impelled with prodigious force against them . The transports
returned , therefore , before the defences were complete , and contrived
to get into the harbor . Pompey immediately formed his plan for
embarking the remainder of his army . 

He filled the streets of the city with barricades and pitfalls
excepting two streets which led to the place of embarkation . The
object of these obstructions was to embarrass Caesar ' s progress
through the city in case he should force an entrance while his
men were getting on board the ships . He then , in order to divert
Caesar ' s attention from his design , doubled the guards stationed upon
the walls on the evening of his intended embarkation , and ordered
them to make vigorous attacks upon all Caesar ' s forces outside . Then , 
when the darkness came on , he marched his troops through the two
streets which had been left open to the landing-place , and got them
as fast as possible on board the transports . Some of the people of
the town contrived to make known to Caesar ' s army what was going on , 
by means of signals from the walls; the army immediately brought
scaling ladders in great numbers , and , mounting the walls with great
ardor and impetuosity , they drove all before them , and soon broke
open the gates and got possession of the city . But the barricades
and pitfalls , together with the darkness , so embarrassed their
movements that Pompey succeeded in completing his embarkation and
sailing away . 

Caesar had no ships in which to follow . He returned to Rome . He met , 
of course , with no opposition . He re-established the government
there , organized the Senate anew , and obtained supplies of corn
from the public granaries and of money from the city treasury in
the capital . In going to the Capitoline Hill after this treasure , 
he found the officer who had charge of the money stationed there
to defend it . He told Caesar that it was contrary to law for him to
enter . Caesar said that , for men with swords in their hands , there
was no law . The officer still refused to admit him . Caesar then
told him to open the doors or he would kill him on the spot .  " And
you must understand , " he added ,  " that it will be easier for me to
do it than it has been to say it . " The officer resisted no longer , 
and Caesar went in . 

After this , Caesar spent some time in vigorous campaigns in Italy , 
Spain , Sicily , and Gaul , wherever there was manifested any opposition
to his sway . When this work was accomplished , and all these countries
were completely subjected to his dominion , he began to turn his
thoughts to the plan of pursuing Pompey across the Adriatic Sea . 




FEARLESS SAINT GENEVIEVE , PATRON SAINT OF PARIS

By Charlotte M . Yonge



Four hundred years of the Roman dominion had entirely tamed the once
wild and independent Gauls . Everywhere , except in the moorlands of
Brittany , they had become as much like Romans themselves as they
could accomplish; they had Latin names , spoke the Latin tongue , all
their personages of higher rank were enrolled as Roman citizens , 
their chief cities were colonies where the laws were administered
by magistrates in the Roman fashion , and the houses , dress , and
amusements were the same as those of Italy . The greater part of
the towns had been converted to Christianity , though some paganism
still lurked in the more remote villages and mountainous districts . 

It was upon these civilized Gauls that the terrible attacks came
from the wild nations who poured out of the center and east of
Europe . The Franks came over the Rhine and its dependent rivers , 
and made furious attacks upon the peaceful plains , where the Gauls
had long lived in security , and reports were everywhere heard
of villages harried by wild horsemen , with short double-headed
battle-axes , and a horrible short pike covered with iron and with
several large hooks , like a gigantic artificial minnow , and like
it fastened to a long rope , so that the prey which it had grappled
might be pulled up to the owner . Walled cities usually stopped them , 
but every farm or villa outside was stripped of its valuables , set
on fire , the cattle driven off , and the more healthy inhabitants
seized for slaves . 

It was during this state of things that a girl was born to a wealthy
peasant at the village now called Nanterre , about two miles from
Lutetia , which was already a prosperous city , though not as yet so
entirely the capital as it was destined to become under the name of
Paris . She was christened by an old Gallic name , probably Gwenfrewi , 
or White Stream , in Latin Genovefa , but she is best known by the late
French form of Genevieve . When she was about seven years old , two
celebrated bishops passed through the village , Germanus , of Auxerre , 
and Lupus , of Troyes , who had been invited to Britain to dispute
the false doctrines of Pelagius . All the inhabitants flocked into
the church to see them , pray with them , and receive their blessing;
and here the sweet childish devotion of Geneviaeve so struck Germanus , 
that he called her to him , talked to her , made her sit beside him
at the feast , gave her his special blessing , and presented her
with a copper medal with a cross engraven upon it . From that time
the little maiden always deemed herself especially consecrated to
the service of Heaven , but she still remained at home , daily keeping
her father ' s sheep , and spinning their wool as she sat under the
trees watching them , but always with her heart full of prayer . 

After this St . Germanus proceeded to Britain , and there encouraged
his converts to meet the heathen Picts at Maes Garmon , in Flintshire , 
where the exulting shout of the white-robed catechumens turned to
flight the wild superstitious savages of the north , --and the Hallelujah
victory was gained without a drop of bloodshed . He never lost sight
of Geneviaeve , the little maid whom he had so early distinguished
for her piety . 

After she lost her parents she went to live with her godmother , 
and continued the same simple habits , leading a life of sincere
devotion and strict self-denial , constant prayer and much charity
to her poorer neighbors . 

In the year 451 the whole of Gaul was in the most dreadful state
of terror at the advance of Attila , the savage chief of the Huns , 
who came from the banks of the Danube with a host of savages
of hideous features , scarred and disfigured to render them more
frightful . The old enemies , the Goths and the Franks , seemed like
friends compared with these formidable beings , whose cruelties
were said to be intolerable , and of whom every exaggerated story
was told that could add to the horrors of the miserable people who
lay in their path . Tidings came that this  " Scourge of God , " as
Attila called himself , had passed the Rhine , destroyed Tongres and
Metz , and was in full march for Paris . The whole country was in the
utmost terror . Every one seized their most valuable possessions , 
and would have fled; but Geneviaeve placed herself on the only bridge
across the Seine , and argued with them , assuring them , in a strain
that was afterwards thought of as prophetic , that , if they would
pray , repent , and defend instead of abandoning their homes , God
would protect them . They were at first almost ready to stone her
for thus withstanding their panic , but just then a priest arrived
from Auxerre , with a present for Geneviaeve from St . Germanus , and
they were thus reminded of the high estimation in which he held
her; they became ashamed of their violence , and she led them back
to pray and to arm themselves . In a few days they heard that Attila
had paused to besiege Orleans , and that Aaetius , the Roman general , 
hurrying from Italy , had united his troops with those of the Goths and
Franks , and given Attila so terrible a defeat at Chaelons that the
Huns were fairly driven out of Gaul . And here it must be mentioned
that when in the next year , 452 , Attila with his murderous host , 
came down into Italy , and after horrible devastation of all the
northern provinces , came to the gates of Rome , no one dared to meet
him but one venerable bishop , Leo , the Pope , who , when his flock
were in transports of despair , went forth only accompanied by one
magistrate to meet the invader , and endeavored to turn his wrath
aside . The savage Huns were struck with awe by the fearless majesty
of the unarmed old man . They conducted him safely to Attila , who
listened to him with respect , and promised not to lead his people
into Rome , provided a tribute should be paid to him . He then
retreated , and , to the joy of all Europe , died on his way back to
his native dominions . 

But with the Huns the danger and suffering of Europe did not end . 
The happy state described in the Prophets as  " dwelling safely , with
none to make them afraid , " was utterly unknown in Europe throughout
the long break-up of the Roman Empire; and in a few more years
the Franks were overrunning the banks of the Seine , and actually
venturing to lay siege to the Roman walls of Paris itself . The
fortifications were strong enough , but hunger began to do the work
of the besiegers , and the garrison , unwarlike and untrained , began
to despair . But Geneviaeve ' s courage and trust never failed; and
finding no warriors willing to run the risk of going beyond the
walls to obtain food for the women and children who were perishing
around them , this brave shepherdess embarked alone in a little
boat , and guiding it down the stream , landed beyond the Frankish
camp , and repairing to the different Gallic cities , she implored them
to send succor to their famished brethren . She obtained complete
success . Probably the Franks had no means of obstructing the passage
of the river , so that a convoy of boats could easily penetrate
into the town : at any rate they looked upon Geneviaeve as something
sacred and inspired whom they durst not touch; probably as one of
the battle-maids in whom their own myths taught them to believe . 
One account indeed says that , instead of going alone to obtain help , 
Geneviaeve placed herself at the head of a forage party , and that
the mere sight of her inspired bearing caused them to be allowed
to enter and return in safety; but the boat version seems the more
probable , since a single boat on the broad river would more easily
elude the enemy than a troop of Gauls pass through their army . 

But a city where all the valor resided in one woman could not long
hold out , and in another inroad , when Genevieve was absent , Paris
was actually seized by the Franks . Their leader , Hilperik , was
absolutely afraid of what the mysteriously brave maiden might do
to him , and commanded the gates of the city to be carefully guarded
lest she should enter; but Geneviaeve learnt that some of the chief
citizens were imprisoned , and that Hilperik intended their death , 
and nothing could withhold her from making an effort in their
behalf . The Franks had made up their minds to settle and not to
destroy . They were not burning and slaying indiscriminately , but
while despising the Romans , as they called the Gauls , for their
cowardice , they were in awe of their superior civilization and
knowledge of arts . The country people had free access to the city , 
and Geneviaeve in her homely gown and veil passed by Hilperik ' s
guards without being suspected of being more than any ordinary
Gaulish village-maid; and thus she fearlessly made her way , even
to the old Roman halls , where the long-haired Hilperik was holding
his wild carousal . Would that we knew more of that interview--one
of the most striking that ever took place ! 

We can only picture to ourselves the Roman tesselated pavement
bestrewn with wine , bones , and fragments of the barbarous revelry . 
There were , untamed Franks , their sun-burnt hair tied up in a knot
at the top of their heads , and falling down like a horse ' s tail , 
their faces close-shaven , except two huge mustaches , and dressed
in tight leather garments , with swords at their wide belts . Some
slept , some feasted , some greased their long locks , some shouted
out their favorite war-songs around the table , which was covered
with the spoils of churches , and at their head sat the wild , 
long-haired chieftain , who was a few years later driven away by
his own followers for his excesses , --the whole scene was all that
was abhorrent to a pure , devout , and faithful nature , most full of
terror to a woman . Yet there , in her strength , stood the peasant
maiden , her heart full of trust and pity , her looks full of the power
that is given by fearlessness of them that can kill the body . What
she said we do not know--we only know that the barbarous Hilperik
was overawed; he trembled before the expostulations of the brave
woman , and granted all she asked--the safety of his prisoners , and
mercy to the terrified inhabitants . No wonder that the people of
Paris have ever since looked back to Genevieve as their protectress , 
and that in after-ages she has grown to be the patron saint of the
city . 

She lived to see the son of Hilperik , Chlodwig , or , as he was more
commonly called , Clovis , marry a Christian wife , Clotilda , and after
a time become a Christian . She saw the foundation of the Cathedral
of Notre Dame , and of the two famous churches of St . Denys and of
St . Martin of Tours , and gave her full share to the first efforts
for bringing the rude and bloodthirsty conquerors to some knowledge
of Christian faith , mercy , and purity . After a life of constant
prayer and charity she died , three months after King Clovis , in
the year 512 , the 89th of her age . 



