There was once a miller who was very poor , but he had a beautiful
daughter . Now , it happened that he came to speak to the king , and , to
give himself importance , he said to him ,  " I have a daughter who can
spin straw into gold . " 

The king said to the miller ,  " That is a talent that pleases me well;
if she be as skilful as you say , bring her to-morrow to the palace , 
and I will put her to the proof . " 

When the maiden was brought to him , he led her to a room full of
straw , gave her a wheel and spindle , and said ,  " Now set to work , and
if by the morrow this straw be not spun into gold , you shall die . " He
locked the door , and left the maiden alone . 

The poor girl sat down disconsolate , and could not for her life think
what she was to do; for she knew not--how could she ? --the way to spin
straw into gold; and her distress increased so much that at last she
began to weep . All at once the door opened , and a little man entered , 
and said ,  " Good evening , my pretty miller ' s daughter why are you
weeping so bitterly ? " 

 " Ah ! " answered the maiden ,  " I must spin straw into gold , and know not
how to do it . " 

The little man said ,  " What will you give me if I do it for you ? " 

 " My neckerchief , " said the maiden . 

He took the kerchief , sat down before the wheel , and grind , grind , 
grind--three times did he grind--and the spindle was full : then he put
another thread on , and grind , grind , grind , the second was full; so he
spun on till morning; when all the straw was spun , and all the
spindles were full of gold . 

The king came at sunrise , and was greatly astonished and overjoyed at
the sight; but it only made his heart the more greedy of gold . He put
the miller ' s daughter into another much larger room , full of straw , 
and ordered her to spin it all in one night , if life were dear to her . 
The poor helpless maiden began to weep , when once more the door flew
open , the little man appeared , and said ,  " What will you give me if I
spin this straw into gold ? " 

 " My ring from my finger , " answered the maiden . 

The little man took the ring , began to turn the wheel , and , by the
morning , all the straw was spun into shining gold . 

The king was highly delighted when he saw it , but was not yet
satisfied with the quantity of gold; so he put the damsel into a still
larger room , full of straw , and said ,  " Spin this during the night; and
if you do it , you shall be my wife . "  " For , " he thought ,  " if she ' s only
a miller ' s daughter I shall never find a richer wife in the whole
world . " 

As soon as the damsel was alone , the little man came the third time , 
and said ,  " What will you give me if I again spin all this straw for
you ? " 

 " I have nothing more to give you , " answered the girl . 

 " Then promise , if you become queen , to give me your first child . " 

 " Who knows how that may be , or how things may turn out between now and
then ? " thought the girl , but in her perplexity she could not help
herself : so she promised the little man what he desired , and he spun
all the straw into gold . 

When the king came in the morning , and saw that his orders had been
obeyed , he married the maiden , and the beautiful miller ' s daughter
became a queen . After a year had passed she brought a lovely baby into
the world , but quite forgot the little man , till he walked suddenly
into her chamber , and said ,  " Give me what you promised me . " The queen
was frightened , and offered the dwarf all the riches of the kingdom if
he would only leave her her child; but he answered ,  " No; something
living is dearer to me than all the treasures of the world . " 

Then the queen began to grieve and to weep so bitterly , that the
little man took pity upon her and said ,  " I will give you three days;
if in that time you can find out my name , you shall keep the child . " 

All night long the queen thought over every name she had ever heard , 
and sent a messenger through the kingdom , to inquire what names were
usually given to people in that country . When , next day , the little
man came again , she began with Caspar , Melchoir , Balthazar , and
repeated , each after each , all the names she knew or had heard of; but
at each one the little man said ,  " That is not my name . " 

The second day she again sent round about in all directions , to ask
how the people were called , and repeated to the little man the
strangest names she could hear of or imagine : to each he answered
always ,  " That is not my name . " 

The third day the messenger returned and said ,  " I have not been able
to find a single new name; but as I came over a high mountain by a
wood , where the fox and the hare bid each other good-night , I saw a
little house , and before the house was burning a little fire , and
round the fire danced a very funny little man , who hopped upon one
leg , and cried out : --

  " To-day I brew , to-morrow I bake , 
 Next day the queen ' s child I shall take;
 How glad I am that nobody knows
 My name is Rumpelstilzchen ! " 

You may guess how joyful the queen was at hearing this; and when , soon
after , the little man entered and said ,  " Queen , what is my name ? " she
asked him mischievously ,  " Is your name Kunz ? " 

 " No . " 

 " Is your name Carl ? " 

 " No . " 

 " Are you not sometimes called Rumpelstilzchen ? " 

 " A witch has told you that--a witch has told you ! " shrieked the poor
little man , and stamped so furiously with his right foot that it sunk
into the earth up to the hip; then he seized his left foot with both
hands with such violence , that he tore himself right in two . 


