In the city of Famagosta , in the island of Cyprus , there lived a very
rich gentleman . His name was Theodorus : he married a lady who was the
greatest beauty in Cyprus , and she was as rich as himself; she was
called Graciana . They both had every pleasure that wealth could buy , 
and lived in the first style . Besides all this , the lady Graciana
brought her husband a fine little son , who was named Fortunatus; so
one would think nothing could have kept Theodorus from being the most
happy person in the world . But this was not long the case; for when he
had enjoyed all these pleasures for some time , he grew tired of them , 
and began to keep company with young noblemen of the court , with whom
he sat up all night drinking and playing cards , so that in a few years
he spent all his fortune . He was now very sorry for what he had done , 
but it was too late; and there was nothing he could do , but to work at
some trade to support his wife and child . For all this the lady
Graciana never found fault with him , but still loved her husband the
same as before; saying ,  " Dear Theodorus , to be sure I do not know how
to work at any trade; but if I can not help you in earning money , I
will help you to save it . " So Theodorus set to work; and though the
lady Graciana had always been used only to ring her bell for
everything that she wanted , she now scoured the kettles and washed the
clothes with her own hands . 

They went on in this manner till Fortunatus was sixteen years of age . 
When that time came , one day , as they were all sitting at dinner , 
Theodorus fixed his eyes on his son , and sighed deeply . 

 " What is the matter with you , father ? " said Fortunatus . 

 " Ah ! my child , " said Theodorus ,  " I have reason enough to be sorry , 
when I think of the noble fortune which I have spent , and that my
folly will force you to labour for your living . " 

 " Father , " replied Fortunatus ,  " do not grieve about it . I have often
thought that it was time I should do something for myself; and though
I have not been brought up to any trade , yet I hope I can contrive to
support myself somehow . " 

When Fortunatus had done his dinner , he took his hat and walked to the
sea-side , thinking of what he could do , so as to be no longer a burden
to his parents . Just as he reached the sea-shore , the Earl of
Flanders , who had been to Jerusalem , was embarking on board his ship
with all his servants , to set sail for Flanders . Fortunatus now
thought he would offer himself to be the Earl ' s page . When the Earl
saw that he was a smart-looking lad , and heard the quick replies which
he made to his questions , he took him into his service; so at once
they all went on board . On their way the ship stopped a short time at
the port of Venice , where Fortunatus saw many strange things , which
made him wish still more to travel , and taught him much that he did
not know before . 

Soon after this they came to Flanders; and they had not been long on
shore , before the Earl , his master , was married to the daughter of the
Duke of Cleves . The wedding was kept with all sorts of public
feasting , and games on horseback , called tilts , which lasted many
days; and , among the rest , the Earl ' s lady gave two jewels as prizes
to be played for , each of them the value of a hundred crowns . One of
them was won by Fortunatus , and the other by Timothy , a servant of the
Duke of Burgundy; who afterwards ran another tilt with Fortunatus , so
that the winner was to have both the jewels . So they tilted , and , at
the fourth course , Fortunatus hoisted Timothy a full spear ' s length
from his horse , and thus won both the jewels , which pleased the Earl
and Countess so much that they praised Fortunatus , and thought better
of him than ever . At this time , also , Fortunatus had many rich
presents given him by the lords and ladies of the court . But the high
favour shown him made his fellow-servants jealous , and one , named
Robert , who had always pretended a great friendship for Fortunatus , 
made him believe that for all his seeming kindness , the Earl , in
secret , envied him his great skill in tilting . Robert said , too , that
he had heard the Earl give private orders to one of his servants to
find some way of killing him next day , while they should all be out
hunting . 

Fortunatus thanked the wicked Robert for what he thought a great
kindness; and the next day , at daybreak , he took the swiftest horse in
the Earl ' s stables , and left the country . When the Earl heard that
Fortunatus had gone away in a hurry , he was much surprised , and asked
all his servants what they knew about the matter , but they all denied
knowing anything of it , or why he had left them . The Earl then said , 
 " Fortunatus was a lad for whom I had a great esteem; I am sure some of
you must have given him an affront; if I discover it , I shall not fail
to punish the guilty person . " In the meantime , Fortunatus , when he
found himself out of the Earl ' s country , stopped at an inn to refresh
himself , and began to reckon how much he had about him . He took out
all his fine clothes and jewels , and could not help putting them on . 
He then looked at himself in the glass , and thought that , to be sure , 
he was quite a fine smart fellow . Next he took out his purse , and
counted the money that had been given him by the lords and ladies of
the Earl ' s court . He found that in all he had five hundred crowns; so
he bought a horse , and took care to send back the one that he had
taken from the Earl ' s stable . 

He then set off for Calais , crossed the Channel , landed safely at
Dover , and went on to London , where he soon made his way into genteel
company , and had once the honour to dance with the daughter of a Duke
at the Lord Mayor ' s ball . This sort of life , as anybody may well
think , soon made away with his little stock of money . When Fortunatus
found that he had not a penny left , he began to think of going back
again to France , and soon after went on board a ship bound to Picardy . 
He landed in that country , but finding no employment he set off for
Brittany , when he lost his way in crossing a wood , and was forced to
stay in it all night . The next morning he was little better off , for
he could find no path . So he walked about from one part of the wood to
another , till at last , on the evening of the second day , he saw a
spring , at which he drank very heartily; but still he had nothing to
eat , and was ready to die with hunger . When night came on , he heard
the growling of wild beasts , so he climbed up a high tree for safety , 
and he had hardly seated himself in it , before a lion walked fiercely
up to the spring to drink . This made him very much afraid . When the
lion had gone away , a bear came to drink also; and , as the moon shone
very bright , the beast looked up , and saw Fortunatus , and straightway
began to climb up the tree to get at him . 

Fortunatus drew his sword , and sat quiet till the bear was come within
arm ' s length; and then he ran him through the body . This drove the
bear so very savage , that he made a great spring to get at him; but
the bough broke , and down he fell , and lay sprawling and howling on
the ground . Fortunatus now looked around on all sides; and as he saw
no more wild beasts near , he thought this would be a good time to get
rid of the bear at once; so down he came , and killed him at a single
blow . Being almost starved for want of food , the poor youth stooped
down , and was going to suck the blood of the bear; but looking round
once more , to see if any wild beasts were coming , he on a sudden
beheld a beautiful lady standing by his side , with a bandage over her
eyes , leaning upon a wheel , and looking as if she were going to speak , 
which she soon did , in these words :  " Know , young man , that my name is
Fortune; I have the power to bestow wisdom , strength , riches , health , 
beauty , and long life; one of these I am willing to grant you--choose
for yourself which it shall be . " 

Fortunatus was not a moment before he answered :  " Good lady , I wish to
have riches in such plenty that I may never again know what it is to
be so hungry as I now find myself . " The lady then gave him a purse , 
and told him that in all the countries where he might happen to be , he
need only put his hand into the purse as often as he pleased , and he
would be sure to find in it ten pieces of gold; that the purse should
never fail of yielding the same sum as long as it was kept by him and
his children; but that when he and his children should be dead , then
the purse would lose its power . 

Fortunatus now did not know what to do with himself for joy , and began
to thank the lady very much; but she told him that he had better think
of making his way out of the wood . She then directed him which path to
take , and bade him farewell . He walked by the light of the moon , as
fast as his weakness and fatigue would let him , till he came near an
inn . But before he went into it , he thought it would be best to see
whether the Lady Fortune had been as good as her word; so he put his
hand into his purse , and to his great joy he counted ten pieces of
gold . Having nothing to fear , Fortunatus walked boldly up to the inn , 
and called for the best supper they could get ready in a minute;
 " For , " said he ,  " I must wait till to-morrow before I am very nice . I
am so hungry now , that almost anything will do . " Fortunatus very soon
ate quite enough , and then called for every sort of wine in the house , 
and drank his fill . After supper , he began to think what sort of life
he should lead;  " For , " said he to himself ,  " I shall now have money
enough for everything I can desire . " He slept that night in the very
best bed in the house , and the next day he ordered the finest victuals
of all kinds . When he rang his bell , all the waiters tried who should
run the fastest , to ask him what he pleased to want; and the landlord
himself , hearing what a noble guest was come to his house , took care
to be standing at the door to bow to him when he should be passing
out . 

Fortunatus asked the landlord whether any fine horses could be got
near at hand; also , if he knew of some smart-looking , clever
men-servants who wanted places . By chance the landlord was able to
provide him with both . As he had now got everything he wanted , he set
out on the finest horse that was ever seen , with two servants , for the
nearest town . There he bought some grand suits of clothes , put his two
servants into liveries laced with gold , and they went on to Paris . 
Here he took the best house that was to be had , and lived in great
pomp . He invited the nobility , and gave grand balls to all the most
beautiful ladies of the court . He went to all public places of
amusement , and the first lords in the country invited him to their
houses . He had lived in this manner for about a year , when he began to
think of going to Famagosta to visit his parents , whom he had left
very poor .  " But , " thought Fortunatus ,  " as I am young and have not seen
much of the world , I should like to meet with some person of more
knowledge than I have , who would make my journey both useful and
pleasing to me . " Soon after this he met with an old gentleman , called
Loch-Fitty , who was a native of Scotland , and had left a wife and ten
children a great many years ago , in hopes to better his fortune; but
now , owing to many accidents , was poorer than ever , and had not money
enough to take him back to his family . 

When Loch-Fitty found how much Fortunatus wished to obtain knowledge , 
he told him many of the strange adventures he had met with , and gave
him an account of all the countries he had been in , as well as of the
customs , dress , and manners of the people . Fortunatus thought to
himself ,  " This is the very man I stand in need of; " so at once he made
him a good offer , which the old gentleman agreed to , but made the
bargain that he might first go and visit his family . Fortunatus told
him that he should .  " And , " said he ,  " as I am a little tired of being
always in the midst of such noisy pleasures as we find at Paris , I
will , with your leave , go with you to Scotland , and see your wife and
children . " They get out the very next day , and came safe to the house
of Loch-Fitty; and in all the journey , Fortunatus did not once wish to
change his kind companion for all the pleasures and grandeur he had
left behind . Loch-Fitty kissed his wife and children , five of whom
were daughters , and the most beautiful creatures that were ever
beheld . When they were seated , his wife said to him ,  " Ah ! dear Lord
Loch-Fitty , how happy I am to see you once again ! Now , I hope we shall
enjoy each other ' s company for the rest of our lives . What though we
are poor ! We will be content if you will but promise not to think of
leaving us again to get riches , only because we have a noble title . " 

Fortunatus heard this with great surprise .  " What ! " said he ,  " are you a
lord ? Then you shall be a rich lord too . And that you may not think I
lay you under any burden in the fortune I shall give you , I will put
it in your power to make me your debtor instead . Give me your youngest
daughter , Cassandra , for a wife , and accompany us as far as Famagosta , 
and take all your family with you , that you may have pleasant company
on your way back , when you have rested in that place from your
fatigue . " 

Lord Loch-Fitty shed some tears of joy to think he should at last see
his family again raised to all the honours which it had once enjoyed . 
He gladly agreed to the marriage of Fortunatus with his daughter
Cassandra , and then told him the reasons that had forced him to drop
his title and live poor at Paris . When Lord Loch-Fitty had ended his
story , they agreed that the very next morning the Lady Cassandra
should be asked to accept the hand of Fortunatus; and that , if she
should consent , they would set sail in a few days for Famagosta . The
next morning the offer was made to her , as had been agreed on , and
Fortunatus had the pleasure of hearing from the lips of the beautiful
Cassandra , that the very first time she cast her eyes on him she
thought him the most handsome gentleman in the world . 

Everything was soon ready for them to set out on the journey . 
Fortunatus , Lord Loch-Fitty , his lady , and their ten children , then
set sail in a large ship : they had a good voyage , and landed safe at
the port of Famagosta . There , however , Fortunatus found , with great
grief and self-reproach , that his father and mother were both dead . 
However , as he was an easy-tempered gentleman , and had his betrothed
Cassandra and her whole family to reconcile him to his grief , it did
not last very long; the wedding took place almost immediately; so they
lived all together in Famagosta , and in very great style . By the end
of the first year , the Lady Cassandra had a little son , who was
christened Ampedo; and the next year another , who was christened
Andolucia . For twelve years Fortunatus lived a very happy life with
his wife and children , and his wife ' s kindred; and as each of her
sisters had a fortune given her from the purse of Fortunatus , they
soon married very well . But by this time he began to long to travel
again; and he thought , as he was now so much older and wiser than when
he was at Paris , he might go by himself , for Lord Loch-Fitty was at
this time too old to bear fatigue . After he had , with great trouble , 
got the consent of the Lady Cassandra , and made her a promise to stay
away only two years , he made all things ready for his journey; and
taking his lady into one of his private rooms , he showed her three
chests of gold . He told her to keep one of these for herself , and take
charge of the other two for their sons , in case any evil should happen
to him . He then led her back to the room where the whole family were
sitting , embraced them all tenderly one by one , and set sail with a
fair wind for Alexandria . 

When Fortunatus came to this place , he was told it was the custom to
make a handsome present to the sultan; so he sent him a piece of plate
that cost five thousand pounds . The sultan was so much pleased with
this , that he ordered a hundred casks of spices to be given to
Fortunatus in return . Fortunatus sent these straight to the Lady
Cassandra , with the most tender letters , by the same ship that brought
him , which was then going back to Famagosta . Having stated that he
wished to travel through his country by land , he obtained from the
sultan such passports and letters as he might stand in need of , to the
other princes in those parts . He then bought a camel , hired proper
servants , and set off on his travels . He went through Turkey , Persia , 
and from thence to Carthage; he next went into the country of Prester
John , who rides upon a white elephant , and has kings to wait on him . 
Fortunatus made him some rich presents , and went on to Calcutta; and , 
in coming back , he took Jerusalem in the way , and so came again to
Alexandria , where he had the good fortune to find the same ship that
had brought him , and to learn from the captain that his wife and
family were all in perfect health . The first thing he did was to pay a
visit to his old friend the sultan , to whom he again made a handsome
present , and was invited to dine at his palace . After dinner , the
sultan said :  " It must be vastly amusing , Fortunatus , to hear an
account of all the places you have seen; pray favour me with a history
of your travels . " Fortunatus did as he was desired , and pleased the
sultan very much by telling him the many odd adventures he had met
with; and , above all , the manner of his first becoming known to the
Lord Loch-Fitty , and the desire of that lord to maintain the honours
of his family . When he had ended , the sultan said he was greatly
pleased with what he had heard , but that he possessed a more curious
thing than any Fortunatus had told him of . He then led him into a room
almost filled with jewels , opened a large closet , and took out a cap , 
which he said was of greater value than all the rest . Fortunatus
thought the sultan was joking , and told him he had seen many a better
cap than that .  " Ah ! " said the sultan ,  " that is because you do not know
its value . Whoever puts this cap on his head , and wishes to be in any
part of the world , will find himself there in a moment . " 

 " Indeed ! " said Fortunatus;  " and pray , is the man living who made it ? " 

 " I know nothing about that , " said the sultan . 

 " One would hardly believe it , " said Fortunatus .  " Pray , sir , is it very
heavy ? " 

 " Not at all , " replied the sultan;  " you may feel it . " 

Fortunatus took up the cap , put it on his head , and could not help
wishing himself on board the ship that was going back to Famagosta . In
less than a moment he was carried on board of her , just as she was
ready to sail; and there being a brisk gale , they were out of sight in
half an hour , before the sultan had even time to repent of his folly
for letting Fortunatus try the cap on his head . The ship came safe to
Famagosta , after a happy passage , and Fortunatus found his wife and
children well; but Lord Loch-Fitty and his lady had died of old age , 
and were buried in the same grave . 

Fortunatus now began to take great pleasure in teaching his two boys
all sorts of useful learning , and also such manly sports as wrestling
and tilting . Now and then he thought about the curious cap which had
brought him home , and then would wish he could just take a peep at
what was passing in other countries; which wish was always fulfilled : 
but he never stayed there more than an hour or two , so that the Lady
Cassandra did not miss him , and was no longer made uneasy by his love
of travelling . 

At last , Fortunatus began to grow old , and the Lady Cassandra fell
sick and died . The loss of her caused him so much grief , that soon
after he fell sick too . As he thought he had not long to live , he
called his two sons to his bedside , and told them the secrets of the
purse and the cap , which he begged they would not , on any account , 
make known to others .  " Follow my example , " said he :  " I have had the
purse these forty years , and no living person knew from what source I
obtained my riches . " He then told them to make use of the purse
between them , and to live together in friendship; and embracing them , 
died soon after . Fortunatus was buried with great pomp by the side of
Lady Cassandra , in his own chapel , and was for a long time mourned by
the people of Famagosta . 


