There was a man who owned a donkey , which had carried his sacks to the
mill industriously for many years , but whose strength had come to an
end , so that the poor beast grew more and more unfit for work . The
master determined to stop his food , but the donkey , discovering that
there was no good intended to him , ran away and took the road to
Bremen :  " There , " thought he ,  " I can turn Town Musician . " 

When he had gone a little way , he found a hound lying on the road and
panting , like one who was tired with running .  " Hollo ! what are you
panting so for , worthy Seize  ' em ? " asked the donkey . 

 " Oh ! " said the dog ,  " just because I am old , and get weaker every day , 
and cannot go out hunting , my master wanted to kill me , so I have
taken leave of him; but how shall I gain my living now ? " 

 " I ' ll tell you what , " said the donkey ,  " I am going to Bremen to be
Town Musician; come with me and take to music too . I will play the
lute , and you shall beat the drum . " 

The dog liked the idea , and they travelled on . It was not long before
they saw a cat sitting by the road , making a face like three rainy
days . 

 " Now then , what has gone wrong with you old Whiskers ? " said the
donkey . 

 " Who can be merry when his neck is in danger ? " answered the cat . 
 " Because I am advanced in years , and my teeth are blunt , and I like
sitting before the fire and purring better than chasing the mice
about , my mistress wanted to drown me . I have managed to escape , but
good advice is scarce; tell me where I shall go to ? " 

 " Come with us two to Bremen; you understand serenading; you also can
become a Town Musician . " 

The cat thought it a capital idea , and went with them . Soon after the
three runaways came to a farmyard , and there sat a cock on the gate , 
crowing with might and main . 

 " You crow loud enough to deafen one , " said the donkey;  " what is the
matter with you ? " 

 " I prophesied fair weather , " said the cock ,  " because it is our good
mistress ' s washing-day , and she wants to dry the clothes; but because
to-morrow is Sunday , and company is coming , the mistress has no pity
on me , and has told the cook to put me into the soup to-morrow , and I
must have my head cut off to-night : so now I am crowing with all my
might as long as I can . " 

 " O you old Redhead , " said the donkey ,  " you had better come with us; we
are going to Bremen , where you will certainly find something better
than having your head cut off; you have a good voice , and if we all
make music together , it will be something striking . " 

The cock liked the proposal , and they went on , all four together . 

But they could not reach the city of Bremen in one day , and they came
in the evening to a wood , where they agreed to spend the night . The
donkey and the dog laid themselves down under a great tree , but the
cat and the cock went higher--the cock flying up to the topmost
branch , where he was safest . Before he went to sleep he looked round
towards all the four points of the compass , and he thought he saw a
spark shining in the distance . He called to his companions that there
must be a house not far off; for he could see a light . The donkey
said :  " Then we must rise and go to it , for the lodgings here are very
bad; " and the dog said ,  " Yes; a few bones with a little flesh on them
would do me good . " So they took the road in the direction where the
light was , and soon saw it shine brighter; and it got larger and
larger till they came to a brilliantly-illumined robber ' s house . The
donkey , being the biggest , got up at the window and looked in . 

 " What do you see , Greybeard ? " said the cock . 

 " What do I see ? " answered the donkey :  " a table covered with beautiful
food and drink , and robbers are sitting round it and enjoying
themselves . " 

 " That would do nicely for us , " said the cock . 

 " Yes , indeed , if we were only there , " replied the donkey . 

The animals then consulted together how they should manage to drive
out the robbers , till at last they settled on a plan . Tie donkey was
to place himself with his forefeet on the window-sill , the dog to
climb on the donkey ' s back , and the cat on the dog ' s , and , at last , 
the cock was to fly up and perch himself on the cat ' s head . When that
was done , at a signal they began their music all together : the donkey
brayed , the dog barked , the cat mewed , and the cock crowed; then , with
one great smash , they dashed through the window into the room , so that
the glass clattered down . The robbers jumped up at this dreadful
noise , thinking that nothing less than a ghost was coming in , and ran
away into the wood in a great fright . The four companions then sat
down at the table , quite content with what was left there , and ate as
if they were expecting to fast for a month to come . 

When the four musicians had finished , they put out the light , and each
one looked out for a suitable and comfortable sleeping-place . The
donkey lay down on the dunghill , the dog behind the door , the cat on
the hearth near the warm ashes , and the cock set himself on the
hen-roost; and , as they were all tired with their long journey , they
soon went to sleep . Soon after midnight , as the robbers in the
distance could see that no more lights were burning in the house , and
as all seemed quiet , the captain said ,  " We ought not to have let
ourselves be scared so easily , " and sent one of them to examine the
house . The messenger found everything quiet , went into the kitchen to
light a candle , and , thinking the cat ' s shining fiery eyes were live
coals , he held a match to them to light it . But the cat did not
understand the joke , flew in his face , spat at him , and scratched . He
was dreadfully frightened , ran away , and was going out of the back
door; when the dog , who was lying there , jumped up and bit him in the
leg . As he ran through the yard , past the dunghill , the donkey gave
him a good kick with his hind-foot; and the cock being awakened , and
made quite lively by the noise , called out from the hen-roost
 " Cock-a-doodle-doo ! " 

The robber ran as hard as he could , back to the captain , and said : 
 " Oh , dear ! in the house sits a horrid old witch , who blew at me , and
scratched my face with her long fingers; and by the door stands a man
with a knife , who stabbed me in the leg; and in the yard lies a black
monster , who hit me with a club; and up on the roof there sits the
judge , who called out ,  ' Bring the rascal up here ' --so I made the best
of my way off . " 

From that time the robbers never trusted themselves again in the
house; but the four musicians liked it so well that they could not
make up their minds to leave it , and spent there the remainder of
their days , as the last person who told the story is ready to avouch
for a fact . 


