Once there was a little village maiden , the prettiest ever seen . Her
mother was foolishly fond of her , and her grandmother likewise . The
old woman made for her a little hood , which became the damsel so well , 
that ever after she went by the name of Little Red-Riding-Hood . One
day , when her mother was making cakes , she said ,  " My child , you shall
go and see your grandmother , for I hear she is not well; and you shall
take her some of these cakes , and a pot of butter . " 

Little Red-Riding-Hood was delighted to go , though it was a long walk;
but she was a good child , and fond of her kind grandmother . Passing
through a wood , she met a great wolf , who was most eager to eat her
up , but dared not , because of a woodcutter who was busy hard by . So he
only came and asked her politely where she was going . The poor child , 
who did not know how dangerous it is to stop and speak to wolves , 
replied ,  " I am going to see my grandmother , and to take her a cake and
a pot of butter , which my mother has sent her . " 

 " Is it very far from hence ? " asked the wolf . 

 " Oh yes , it is just above the mill which you may see up there--the
first house you come to in the village . " 

 " Well , " said the wolf ,  " I will go there also , to inquire after your
excellent grandmother; I will go one way , and you the other , and we
will see who can be there first . " 

So he ran as fast as ever he could , taking the shortest road , but the
little maiden took the longest; for she stopped to pluck roses in the
wood , to chase butterflies , and gather nosegays of the prettiest
flowers she could find--she was such a happy and innocent little soul . 

The wolf was not long in reaching the grand-mother ' s door . He knocked , 
Toc--toc , and the grandmother said ,  " Who is there ? " 

 " It is your child , Little Red-Riding-Hood , " replied the wicked beast , 
imitating the girl ' s voice;  " I bring you a cake and a pot of butter , 
which my mother has sent you . " 

The grandmother , who was ill in her bed , said ,  " Very well , my dear , 
pull the string and the latch will open . " The wolf pulled the
string--the door flew open; he leaped in , fell upon the poor old
woman , and ate her up in less than no time , tough as she was , for he
had not tasted anything for more than three days . Then he carefully
shut the door , and laying himself down snugly in the bed , waited for
Little Red-Riding-Hood , who was not long before she came and knocked , 
Toc--toc , at the door . 

 " Who is there ? " said the wolf; and the little maiden , hearing his
gruff voice , felt sure that her poor grandmother must have caught a
bad cold and be very ill indeed . 

So she answered cheerfully ,  " It is your child , Little
Red-Riding-Hood , who brings you a cake and a pot of butter that my
mother has sent you . " 

Then the wolf , softening his voice as much as he could , said ,  " Pull
the string , and the latch will open . " 

So Little Red-Riding-Hood pulled the string and the door opened . The
wolf , seeing her enter , hid himself as much as he could under the
cover-lid of the bed , and said in a whisper ,  " Put the cake and the pot
of butter on the shelf , and then make haste and come to bed , for it is
very late . " 

Little Red-Riding-Hood did not think so; but , to please her
grandmother , she undressed herself and began to get ready for bed , 
when she was very much astonished to find how different the old woman
looked from ordinary . 

 " Grandmother , what great arms you have ! " 

 " That is to hug you the better , my dear . " 

 " Grandmother , what great ears you have ! " 

 " That is to hear you the better , my dear . " 

 " Grandmother , what great eyes you have ! " 

 " That is to see you the better , my dear . " 

 " Grandmother , what a great mouth you have ! " 

 " That is to eat you up , " cried the wicked wolf; and immediately he
fell upon poor Little Red-Riding-Hood , and ate her up in a moment . 


