In the time of the illustrious Merinous , it was indeed a pleasure to
be a king; the laws were just , the people obedient , and peace was over
the land . This monarch would have been the happiest of men , but for
the continual complaints of his consort , which tore his very heart in
twain . She wept continually for her daughters , nineteen of whom had
perished in the flower of youth . The Fairy of the Fountain had
promised a twentieth; but years passed away in fruitless expectation . 
 " You have neglected to do the fairy sufficient homage , " said the king
one day;  " I shall give orders to conduct you to the foot of the
mountain with pomp and splendour . But when arrived there the mountain
itself must be climbed on foot , with many fatigues : most women would
rather die childless than encounter them . " 

 " Courage shall not be wanting on my part , " said the queen ,  " and I wish
to set out immediately . " 

The king kissed her forehead , bade her good-night , and fell asleep . 

At early dawn appeared in the grand court of the palace an equipage , 
dazzling as the sun itself; the wheels were of massy gold , with
emerald nails , which sparkled in the light . It was drawn by forty-two
horses , white as snow , whose reins were of rose-coloured satin , the
fashion of that period . They snorted impatiently , striking fire from
the pavement beneath their feet; their eyes were inflamed; their bits
covered with foam , and their proud and triumphant air seemed already
to announce the success of the queen ' s enterprise . Three thousand
chevaliers , armed at all points and mounted on fiery coursers , wheeled
about the chariot , the air resounding with their joyful acclamations
of-- " _Long live King Merinous and his august spouse ! _ " 

The queen saluted the people with the utmost grace and condescension , 
which caused such immoderate joy , that she was almost stifled by the
pressure of the crowd : but the guards gently kept them at a distance , 
and the procession passed on . 

When her majesty had reached the foot of the mountain , she alighted
from her chariot , and , accompanied by only four maids-of-honour , 
proceeded on foot . 

This mountain was formed of slippery earth , slightly covered over with
green turf , but giving way at every step . The queen ' s pretty little
white satin shoes were soon left behind; and her feet next stuck so
fast that she could not withdraw them; her fair hands were in the same
plight; she cried aloud for succour , fearing she should be completely
buried alive . 

Turning then round to look for her maids-of-honour , she perceived that
they had fallen flat on their faces  ( the impression remains till this
day ) , and were struggling , making the most desperate efforts , less in
consideration of their own danger than that of the queen . In fine , 
after four hours and a half ' s patient perseverance they succeeded in
regaining their feet; and strange to say , no mud or clay attached
itself to their clothes; nothing worse than a slight shade of the
green turf , which assumed the appearance of a gauze veil . The fairy
then , seeing the queen willing to overcome difficulties , would not try
her further , but with one stroke of a wand reduced the mountain two or
three hundred feet; the remaining height was very dry and easy of
ascent . 

The queen was thus conducted to a delicious grove : a coral fountain
rose in the midst; its waters , of the purest rose-colour , wound along
the meadow , murmuring plaintive airs , whose words were perfectly
distinguishable . The fairy there welcomed her majesty , who prepared to
explain the occasion of her journey; but that was quite unnecessary . 
The fairy , exacting profound secrecy , presented her with a phial of
water drawn from the fountain , strictly ordering that it should be
broken when she had drank it all . The queen , charmed by this
reception , made presents of inestimable value , and rejoined her
maids-of-honour , who had been thrown into an enchanted sleep . They
then returned to the palace in such high spirits , that all the court
danced and sung for a month afterwards . 

In due course her majesty became , for the twentieth time , a joyful
mother . 

The magnificence and liberality displayed on this occasion exceed
belief . The royal palace was surrounded by three hundred large spouts
which poured forth alternately , night and day the choicest sweetmeats , 
confectionery , and money; the streets , in fact , were filled--the
passengers had only to stoop down and be satisfied . 

But in the midst of these festivities the Fairy of the Fountain , 
uncovering the little princess ' s cradle , which was of mother-o ' -pearl
studded with diamonds , perceived a beautiful butterfly , placed
immediately under the infant ' s left eye . 

The chief cradle-rocker , who dreaded being taxed with negligence , took
a humming-bird ' s wing , and endeavoured to chase it away , but all in
vain : it remained quite unconcerned in the same spot , extending its
large wings of rose-colour and azure-blue on the face of the princess , 
appearing rather to caress than to wish to do her any injury .  " Ah ! " 
said the fairy ,  " this butterfly is not what you imagine . It is a
powerful fairy , who presides at the birth of the most distinguished
princesses , and endows them with a degree of levity which generally
leads to misfortune . I can lessen the evil , without doubt , but I
cannot entirely avert it . " The queen wept bitterly at this sad news , 
and the king saw no person during eight days . He then ceased to think
on the subject . 

Misfortunes rarely enter into the speculations of kings . Masters of
the destinies of others , mankind flatter them into a belief that their
power can almost control fate itself . Accordingly , the visit of the
butterfly did not produce much permanent inquietude . The
poets-laureate and literati of the court turned it into numerous
sentimental conceits; amongst others , that the insect had fastened on
the princess ' s cheek mistaking it for a rose . This idea branched out
into a hundred elegies , a thousand madrigals , and fifteen hundred
songs , which were sung in all the principal families , and adapted to
airs , some already known , and others composed for the occasion . 

The fairy frequently visited her little charge , but was unable to
conquer her fickle disposition . Ten different nurses had already been
obliged to give her up; she scratched them , bit them , and obstinately
refused to be fed . When she grew older , and began her education , she
was so easily wearied and vexed , that no one dared to contradict her . 
The fairy was consulted; who made her smell at a very rare flower . 
This produced a degree of intelligence so extraordinary , that in three
days she could read , write , speak all languages , and play on every
instrument after just twenty-three minutes ' application . 

The queen was now delighted , for the princess ' s talents were noised
abroad equally with her beauty . She had scarcely attained the age of
fourteen when many kings sought the honour of her hand . The good King
Merinous was well stricken in years , and fondly desired to see
Papillette established . All who seemed worthy of her received a
favourable reception , and amongst this number was the accomplished
Prince Favourite . After he had been presented in due form , the old
monarch asked his daughter what she thought of their new guest . 

 " Sire , " replied the maiden ,  " I have been brought up with too much
modesty and reserve to bestow attention on strangers of the other
sex . " 

 " That is true , " returned the monarch;  " but merely regarding him as a
picture , how has he appeared to you ? " 

 " Tall and handsome , " answered Papillette ,  " his chestnut hair clinging
in close and crisping curls to his ivory brow; his eyes of
violet-blue , filled with soft vivacity; his teeth , of the most
brilliant white , divide lips of coral; his nose is perfect Grecian , 
and his limbs like the rarest statuary . I might say more , had I
ventured to look at the prince . " 

 " It is enough , " said the king;  " your first glance has shown you
enough . I am delighted that you are so sensible to the merits of
Prince Favourite , as I design him for your husband . Love him
accordingly . " 

 " Your majesty ' s commands are laws to your dutiful daughter , " replied
Papillette . 

One may easily imagine with what magnificence preparations were made
for the nuptials; the king hastened them , lest his daughter ' s
fickleness and levity might cause disappointment to their dearest
hopes . 

Papillette one day , while steadily regarding her lover , who was
kneeling before her , appeared struck by something which made an
impression as sudden as disagreeable . She repulsed Prince Favourite , 
saying she was seized with a headache , and could not be troubled with
company . 

The lover submissively arose and went to seek the queen , beseeching
her to find out what he had done , and to intercede in his favour . Her
majesty accordingly questioned the princess , who , bathed in tears , 
threw herself into the arms of her mother , confessing that she had
made a discovery which totally altered her sentiments regarding the
prince .  " Is it possible , " added she ,  " that you have not perceived his
ears , of so unusual a size , and a deep red colour ? " 

 " Is that all ? " cried the queen .  " In truth , I have not observed it; but
to take notice of an imperfection so very trifling , would make us
appear ridiculous indeed . " 

 " People cannot help their feelings , " replied Papillette;  " I have quite
a horror of red ears; it is little worth while to be daughter of a
great king , if one must be crossed and thwarted in the most important
arrangement of life . " 

The queen reasoned long; but this only increased Papillette ' s
resistance : therefore , being quite defenceless against the tears of a
child so dear , her majesty promised to speak to the king . 

Merinous was firm in all his resolutions; he therefore declared , that
his daughter should become the wife of Prince Favourite , whether she
liked it or not . 

The queen had not courage to impart this dreadful intelligence; but
she threw herself on the generosity of the prince , beseeching that he
would himself break the engagement--thus shielding Papillette from the
resentment of the king . 

The distracted lover was ready to die with grief : but promised to do
all she requested . He asked but three days ' grace . 

The queen consented; and Prince Favourite then summoned Queséca , chief
barber to the king ,  " Barber , " said he ,  " each country has its
particular prejudices--its own ideas of beauty; here I find large ears
are deemed a deformity; therefore , I command thee to cut off mine . " 

 " I cannot do it , " replied the barber;  " your royal highness has been
grossly deceived . I have the honour of shaving the first lords of the
court , and I know many of them whose ears are equally red and ten
times as long as those of your royal highness . These very lords are
amongst the most distinguished favourites of the king . " 

 " I have summoned thee , " replied the prince ,  " to operate and not to
prate; obey my orders , and inflame not my ears still further by thy
discourse . " 

 " Alas ! " said the barber ,  " since your royal highness means to sacrifice
them to an unreasonable caprice , what signifies it whether they are
inflamed or not ? " 

At these words the prince made a threatening gesture; and Queséca , no
longer daring to resist , took his razor , and with a trembling hand
separated two of the handsomest ears from one of the finest heads in
the world : for be it known , that the princess only made a pretext of
this assertion , because she had taken a fancy for somebody else . 

The wound bled profusely : the prince applied healing balm; and when in
a condition to appear before her , enclosed his two ears in a little
box , rare and precious , and presented it to Papillette , his heart once
more filled with hope and love . 

The princess eagerly opened the beautiful little casket , then dashed
it with horror to the ground .  " Prince ! " she cried ,  " what can have
induced you to mutilate yourself so cruelly ? Could you imagine that I
would ever wed a man who submitted to lose his ears ? " 

 " Madam , " said the prince , in consternation ,  " it was by my own order
that-- " 

 " What a fool you were then ! " cried Papillette .  " If you are not willing
to become the ridicule of the court , I advise you to quit it with the
greatest expedition imaginable . " 

The prince dared not call her cruel and ungrateful : he retired to the
thickest retreats of a forest , and soon after entirely lost his
reason . 

The princess , once more free , confessed that amongst her numerous
suitors there was one whom she preferred; this was Prince Malabar , 
whose martial mien announced the soul of a hero . The queen did not
deny that Malabar had sought her daughter ' s hand , even before
Favourite aspired to that honour , and King Merinous could now no
longer insist on a marriage with this unfortunate prince , since he was
quite insane , ran naked through the woods , sometimes believing himself
a hind , sometimes a wolf , and never stopping until exhausted by grief
and despair . But in consenting to the marriage of his daughter with
Prince Malabar , the king declared that , should she again change her
mind , he would never forgive her . 

The happy day was once more fixed , and Papillette , three days
preceding , invited her lover to meet her in a delightful grove at the
extremity of the gardens . This grove was planted with myrtles , so
thick and high that they afforded a pleasant shade . Beautiful flowers
sprang up on all sides; and , added to the warblings of the birds in
the trees , were the voices of hidden musicians , singing a chorus , 
composed by the princess herself . This , however , Malabar , who was a
soldier , and not a musician , and who naturally wished to have his
lady-love ' s society all to himself , did not sufficiently appreciate . 

 " Princess , " said he ,  " I had much rather hear you talk than these
people sing . " 

 " Are then those cares despised , " replied Papillette ,  " which I have so
assiduously employed to amuse and gratify you by the display of my
talents ? " 

 " Your dearest talent , " cried he ,  " is that of pleasing : it comprises
every other . Send away these people , I pray . " He added in a tone of
the utmost irritation :  " I hate--I detest music ! " 

 " Have I rightly heard ? " exclaimed the princess angrily;  " and do you
pretend to love , if your soul is insensible to such transporting
sounds ? " 

 " I wish they would transport themselves far enough away , " returned
the lover , who , like most other lovers , could be in an ill humour
sometimes .  " My princess , do order this scraping and squalling to
cease . " 

 " On the contrary , I order my musicians to remain , " answered
Papillette , quite indignant ,  " and never , never will I unite myself to
him whom divine melody hath no power to move . Go , prince , barbarous
alike in taste and science , seek some rustic maid , best suited to your
insensibility . " 

The musicians , too far distant to hear these words , struck up a lively
tune . Malabar imagined this done in derision , and it required all his
respect for the princess to prevent him from falling on them sword in
hand . He repented much his words , but considered it beneath his
dignity to retract them; the princess also refused to retract hers : so
they parted . 

Malabar resolved on instant death . Mounting the noblest courser in his
stable , he rode down to the sea-coast , and plunged him right over a
perpendicular cliff into the waters below . 

The tide happened to be coming in , so that the body was soon washed on
shore , and brought before the eyes of the cruel princess , laid on a
litter formed of willow , hung with draperies of black crape . 

She was standing at the window when the melancholy procession passed , 
and inquired what it was . None dared answer; they only removed the
covering from the face of the corpse . She ottered a loud shriek , and
fainted away . 

The king and queen lavished on her the most tender cares , but all in
vain : she declared that she regarded herself as an inconsolable widow , 
and insisted upon putting on the deepest weeds . 

King Merinous respected this caprice , and ordered twenty thousand
yards of crape for her use . She was just giving orders to have her
apartments festooned with it , and holding a cambric handkerchief to
her eyes , when a little green ape  ( a drawing-room favourite ) dressed
itself in weepers , and disposed one of the widow ' s caps most
tastefully under its chin . 

At this sight the princess burst out laughing so loudly and heartily , 
that all the court ladies , who had been trying which could pull the
longest and most sympathetic countenance , were greatly relieved , and
began immediately to smile a little . 

Gradually , they removed from her eyes the trappings of woe , and
substituted ribbons of rose-colour and blue of every shade and
variety : trying on these , so diverted Papillette ' s melancholy , that
the poor drowned prince was soon forgotten . Her tears indeed were
vain; he had already enough of water . 

The king was in despair .  " Alas ! " said he to the queen ,  " we shall never
have the consolation of marrying Papillette , or beholding our
grandchildren . Of two monarchs so worthy of her , one has lost his
reason , the other has cast himself into the sea; and while we continue
to weep , she , already consoled , thinks only of diverting herself ! " 

 " Sire , " replied the queen ,  " calm your apprehensions . Our daughter is
yet too young to feel true love in all its fervour; let us have
patience , and seek alliance with none but those truly worthy of her
affections . " 

 " Such is my wish , " replied the king ,  " and I begin to turn my views
upon Prince Patipata; he has seen the portrait of Papillette , and is
satisfied; but , though a wise and noble monarch , his personal
qualifications are little in his favor . " 

 " How so ! " rejoined the queen . 

 " Because he is stiff , tall , and spare; his eyes bleared and filmy; his
hair red , and so scanty withal , that it seems like a few stripes of
blasted flax hung around a distaff . " 

A few days after this conversation , Prince Patipata arrived at court;
and the queen did not conceal from Papillette , that , notwithstanding
his personal disadvantages , he was intended for her spouse . 

The princess laughed immoderately , yet , just for amusement , she
displayed towards him all the arts and graces of coquetry to
perfection . 

Prince Patipata having been informed of the deplorable end of his
predecessors , concealed his love as carefully as the others had
proclaimed theirs . He was so reserved and cold , that the princess
longed exceedingly to discover the state of his feelings . Accordingly , 
one day , while Patipata was walking with Salmoé , his intimate
confidant , she hid herself in the trunk of an old tree , which had been
hollowed out by lightning , and afforded apparently a secure retreat . 
The prince seated himself at the foot of it , but he had observed the
princess; and , making a sign of intelligence to his companion , feigned
to continue a conversation of which she was the subject .  " Assuredly , " 
said he ,  " the princess is very handsome; but flatterers , poets , and
painters always overstep the truth . Her portrait has deceived me : its
large blue eyes bear assuredly some resemblance to those of
Papillette , but they bespeak an ardent and feeling heart , while hers
is frivolous , volatile , and incapable of love . Her smile would be
charming , but for its satirical irony . And what is the value of the
loveliest lips in the world , if they open but to deceive and betray ! " 

 " I am much surprised , " replied Salmoé;  " I believed that your royal
highness was equally loving and beloved . " 

 " Far from it , " returned Patipata;  " it would ill become me , plain as I
am , to be confident of pleasing; and I am not dupe enough to yield my
heart without return . Do not you approve of this ? " 

 " No , " answered Salmoé ,  " your royal highness is too modest; I cannot
sufficiently appreciate your humility . " 

The prince affected to be dissatisfied with this praise , and then
moved onwards in order to liberate Papillette , who was very
inconveniently cramped , and almost suffocated with anger . Disagreeable
truths seldom reach the ear of princesses; her resentment , therefore , 
was to be expected . Meanwhile , her heart being equally capricious as
her understanding , she felt ready to pardon , and even , on reflection , 
to justify Patipata . But pride soon combated this weakness; and she
determined to send him away . She complained to her father; assured
him , that by mere chance she had heard the most odious calumnies
uttered by a prince who sported with their dignity , by falsely
pretending to the hand of her whom he slighted and despised . The king
was surprised; but , not having entered into any positive engagements
with Patipata , he readily entered into her feelings , and intimated to
the prince that his adieus would be well received . This Patipata
expected; but , although not naturally presumptuous , he had read
sufficiently into the heart of Papillette to feel some degree of
consolation . 

As no decisive explanation of any kind occurred , he was permitted to
take leave of the princess . This he did with much firmness; while she
appeared so much agitated , that it was remarked by all the court . The
men attributed this to hatred; but the ladies , who knew better , 
pronounced it love . They were convinced of the fact , when day by day
she began to pine and refused to eat; and had not the chief cook every
day invented some new ragout , she would inevitably have died of
hunger . 

The queen was in despair , and dispatched a billet to the Fairy of the
Fountain , fastening it to the tail of a little white mouse , which
served as a messenger on this occasion; it was perfectly acquainted
with the way , and in a few minutes the fairy arrived at the palace . 
The late events were mentioned to her , and the melancholy situation of
the princess . 

 " I understand this case , " said the fairy;  " but it is necessary that
Papillette should give me her confidence . " 

The fairy was so amiable and so much beloved by the princess , that she
easily yielded; and casting down her eyes , confessed that she loved
one who regarded her with contemptuous indifference; and what rendered
her choice still more degrading was , its object being equally ugly as
insensible . 

 " I am then to understand , " replied the fairy ,  " that you wish to be
cured of this unfortunate passion ? " 

 " Alas , no ! " rejoined Papillette ,  " for my only pleasure is in thinking
of him , speaking to him as if he could hear , and persuading myself
that , notwithstanding appearances , he could have loved me , had he
believed my heart capable of steady affections . I shall therefore die , 
leaving him alike ignorant of my regrets and my repentance . " 

 " I would not advise you to die , " said the fairy  " that is the only evil
in the world without a remedy . But , my dear Papillette , what can I do
to console you ? " 

 " Let me see the prince once more , under some metamorphose in which it
is impossible for him to recognise me . " 

 " Very well , " replied the fairy .  " But since you wish to risk it , and
that a simple butterfly can scarcely compromise her dignity in
following a king , under this form I shall transport you to his court . " 

So saying , the Fairy of the Fountain placed on her finger a little
emerald ring , and the princess distinctly felt her arms change their
shape--expand--become flexible , and form two light wings , clothed in
the most brilliant colours . Her little feet quitted the earth , and as
the window was open , she flew out , traversing the air , with a degree
of rapidity which at first caused some sensations of fear . But soon
the eager desire of seeing Patipata urged her forward , although
natural instinct so far prevailed , as to cause frequent descents to
earth , where she rested on every tempting flower . 

At length , entering the prince ' s gardens , she beheld him walking on a
terrace watering a beautiful orange-tree . Her heart beat so violently , 
that her first emotion was to hide , but , soon recovering
self-possession , she flew forwards and rested on a branch which he had
just gathered . 

 " What a charming butterfly ! " observed the king to his chief gardener . 
 " Its colours are truly exquisite; I never recollect having seen any
such before . " 

 " Some new species , come to do mischief , I suppose , " said the gardener , 
preparing to brush it rudely away . But it took refuge on the bosom of
the king , with such caressing and tender familiarity , that only a hard
heart could have done it injury . 

 " Ah , little traitor ! " cried Patipata ,  " thou wishest to win me by thy
fleeting charms , and then escape for ever . I already know too well the
pain of loving fickle beings such as thou . Yet still I must defend
thee , and permit thy return to my orange-tree as often as thou
desirest . " 

Papillette easily penetrated the thoughts of the prince , and although
they uttered a reproach for her inconstancy , she fancied they also
breathed the language of love; and returned in better spirits than
usual to her father ' s palace , where her absence had been unobserved . 
From thenceforward she never omitted making use of the emerald ring , 
which transported her in a few moments to her royal lover : she
followed him to his palace , saw him give audiences , preside in
council , and everywhere prove himself just , great , generous , and
worthy of all her affection . It is true that his eyes were still
filmy , his body spare , and his hair as red as ever; but what signifies
an outside casket when containing a priceless jewel within ? 

Patipata was determined against marriage; he therefore adopted as heir
to the crown the son of a cousin , a young orphan , whom he purposed
bringing up beneath his own eye . This prince little resembled his
uncle : he had been much spoiled in infancy , and it was impossible to
improve him . One day , while conversing with Patipata ,  " Sire , " said he , 
 " I have a favour to ask your majesty , and I pray you not to refuse
me . " 

 " I shall willingly grant you anything reasonable , " replied the king . 

 " It is but your beautiful rose-coloured butterfly , which follows you
everywhere . " 

 " And if I were to give it to you , what then ? " 

 " I would run this golden pin through its body , and stick it to a
branch of the orange-tree , to see how long it would live . Oh , nothing
could be more amusing ! " 

 " Nothing could be more barbarous ! " answered Patipata indignantly .  " Go , 
you inspire me with horror; I banish you from my presence during three
entire days , and remember , that if my butterfly should receive any
injury , you shall be punished with unexampled severity ! " 

The poor butterfly , who had heard this discourse , knew not how to
express its gratitude and joy; it flapped its wings , and sported
around its benefactor . The king held out his finger , and it rested
there .  " Thou shalt quit me no more , " said he .  " It is so sweet to be
loved , even by a butterfly , that I would not willingly prove myself
ungrateful : thou shalt feed at my table; I will serve thee with the
finest fruits , the fairest flowers . Ah ! if I can only make thee
happy ! " 

On the following day , Patipata went out hunting . In vain Papillette
sought him in the park , in the garden , and near the favourite
orange-tree . But his nephew , taking advantage of his absence , began
chasing the pretty butterfly . The courtiers knew that he would one day
be in power , and , eager to gratify his whims , assisted in the wanton
sport : ministers the most pompous , members of council the most
profound , climbed on trees , and capered through the meadows , --one
would have supposed them mad . But the royal insect , so familiar with
the king , was for all others the most capricious of butterflies . It
amused itself in leading the court a long chase , and at length rested
in the private cabinet of the king , where they never once thought of
seeking it . 

Papillette , now all alone , could not resist the opportunity afforded
of looking over a great quantity of writing which lay on the bureau . 
What was her surprise and joy , on there finding verses , the most
passionate and tender , which Patipata had written in her praise ! They
indeed revealed that he was proud , and would not risk a second
refusal; but they vowed to remain faithful to her , and never to wed
another . 

The princess was so affected , that two little tiny tears stood in her
butterfly-eyes . Well indeed she might shed them , for at this moment , 
the wicked little prince , her enemy , came behind , and seizing her by
her two lovely wings , popped her into his hat . 

 " Now I have you ! " cried he; and it is impossible to say what would
have happened , had not the king opportunely returned; when , in taking
off his hat to his uncle , he let the butterfly go . 

She , recovering from her fright , testified affection by many little
endearments; and Patipata , now accustomed to speak to her , exclaimed : 
 " Beautiful insect , how happy art thou ! --thou wanderest from flower to
flower , without giving the preference to any--thou knowest not
love--thou hast not found ingratitude ! I , a king , can not boast of
such happiness . I adore the lovely Princess Papillette , and am
dismissed from her court . I am ugly , it is true; but were I ever so
handsome , I should not be more fortunate , for I too well know her
fickle-- " 

The butterfly here sighed so deeply , that the king started . 

 " Is it possible thou canst feel ? " said he .  " Oh , if my princess had but
as much sensibility , I would know no other care ! With her I would live
in a hut , far , far from the deceitful splendour of a throne . " 

 " The Princess Papillette would willingly accompany you , " said a little
voice , in tones of the finest and purest melody : and the butterfly ' s
rosy wings blushed deep as crimson . 

 " What a prodigy ! " cried Patipata .  " Ah ! butterfly , what dost thou know
of my Papillette ? " 

 " Suppose it were herself ! " said a voice , which seemed to proceed from
a little fountain of rock-crystal which stood between the windows . 

The prince turned round; but instead of the butterfly , he beheld the
Fairy of the Fountain , holding the fair Papillette by the hand . They
were both encircled by a light rose-coloured cloud , which shed a
softly brilliant light around the apartment . 

Patipata bent one knee to the earth , and kissed the hem of the
princess ' s garment . 

 " Come , prince , " said the fairy ,  " King Merinous is apprised of what
passes here . Papillette has overcome her evil destiny . Her affections
are fixed and sure; and their object is yourself And however ready
you may both be to live in a hut together , I advise you not to do it . 
Love is sweeter than royalty , no doubt , but it is not impossible to
unite both . " 

The lovers , transported with joy , placed their feet on the
rose-colored cloud , which instantly carried them to the palace of the
king . The Fairy of the Fountain , to complete her benefactions , 
rendered Patipata as handsome as he was amiable , and the nuptials were
celebrated with suitable pomp and festivity . We are informed that
Papillette had , at first , some slight returns of her natural
disposition; but in one year she became a mother , and from
thenceforward never knew frivolity more . 


